The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Champlain tercentenary, by Henry
Wayland Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Champlain tercentenary
       Final report of the New York Lake Champlain tercentenary
       commission

Author: Henry Wayland Hill

Release Date: May 23, 2023 [eBook #70842]

Language: English

Produced by: Sonya Schermann, John Campbell and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHAMPLAIN
TERCENTENARY ***





  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the three footnotes
  have been placed at the end of the book.

  All chapter headings were printed twice; the first instance of each
  one has been removed to improve readability.

  The tables in this book are best viewed using a monospace font.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




[Illustration: The Rodin Bust “La France”]




                                 The
                        Champlain Tercentenary

                             Final Report
                                of the
                       New York Lake Champlain
                       Tercentenary Commission

                Prepared by HENRY WAYLAND HILL, LL.D.,
                    _Secretary of the Commission_

                            [Illustration]

                                ALBANY
                  J. B. LYON COMPANY, STATE PRINTERS
                                 1913




                             Final Report

                                of the

                Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission

                          State of New York


                                      ALBANY, N. Y., April 10, 1913.

_To the Honorable the Legislature of the State of New York_:

Pursuant to the statute in such case made and provided, we, the
undersigned Commissioners, submit herewith the final report of the
LAKE CHAMPLAIN TERCENTENARY COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.

  Very respectfully,
      H. WALLACE KNAPP, _Chairman_,
      HENRY W. HILL, _Secretary_,
      WALTER C. WITHERBEE, _Treasurer_,
      JOHN H. BOOTH,
      LOUIS C. LAFONTAINE,
      JAMES J. FRAWLEY,
      JAMES A. FOLEY,
      JAMES SHEA,
      JOHN B. RILEY,
      HOWLAND PELL,
      WILLIAM R. WEAVER,
              _Commissioners_.




CONTENTS


  PART ONE: MEMORIALS TO SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN

                                                                  Page
     I. Construction of Memorials                                    1

    II. The Allegorical Bust “La France” and the personnel and
          mission of the French delegation                          11

   III. Social functions and hospitalities extended to the French
          Visitors in New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Boston
          and elsewhere                                             23

    IV. Banquet at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York City,
          May 1, 1912, and the presentation of Rodin bust,
          “La France”                                               29

     V. French Delegation entertained by the Chamber of Commerce
          of the State of New York                                  57

    VI. French Visitors and Commissioners entertained at Ticonderoga,
          later Inspect the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse
          at Crown Point Forts where they formally place
          the Bust, “La France”, and then journey to Plattsburgh.
          Report to Paris                                           69

   VII. They visit Canada, Niagara Falls and sail for France.
          Impressions and comments by French visitors on experiences
          in America                                                87

  VIII. Impressions of M. René Bazin                                99

    IX. Comment in appreciation of the visit of the French delegation
          and Honors conferred                                     107


  PART TWO: DEDICATORY CEREMONIES

     I. Preparation for Dedicatory Ceremonies, including Military
          Functions                                                115

    II. Unveiling Tablet at the English Fort                       123

   III. Dedicatory Ceremonies of the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse
          at Crown Point Forts, July 5, 1912                       131

    IV. Sail down the Lake to Bluff Point                          149

     V. Call at the Summer School, Review of the Fifth Infantry
          regiment, U. S. A., at Plattsburgh Barracks. Tour of
          the city. Reception given by the Hon. Smith M. Weed
          and luncheon at the Fouquet House                        155

    VI. Dedicatory Ceremonies of the Champlain Memorial Statue
          at Plattsburgh, N. Y., July 6, 1912                      161


  PART THREE: CONCLUSION

     I. Federal Co-operation and assistance rendered by Senators
          of the United States, Representatives in Congress and
          others                                                   177

    II. Brief review of the work of the Commission and acknowledgments
          in appreciation of assistance rendered by the representatives
          of Foreign nations, military organizations and
          others                                                   183

   III. Historical significance of the Tercentenary Celebration    193

    IV. Representative Men of the Champlain Region                 201

     V. Conclusion of the work of the New York Lake Champlain
          Tercentenary Commission                                  215


  APPENDIX

     I. Report of House Committee on Foreign Affairs               221

    II. English forts                                              237

   III. Report of Captain Edward Mott                              241

    IV. Notes on the archaeology of the Champlain valley by Prof.
          George H. Perkins, Ph.D., state geologist of Vermont     245

     V. Financial Statement                                        261


  INDEX




ILLUSTRATIONS


  The Rodin Bust “La France”                              Frontispiece
                                                           Facing Page
  Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point Forts                 4

  Champlain Group at Crown Point Memorial                            4

  Memorial to Samuel Champlain at Plattsburgh                        6

  Side View of the Champlain Memorial at Plattsburgh                 6

  Champlain Statue at Plattsburgh                                    8

  Crouching Indian at base of Champlain Statue                       8

  Champlain Memorial at Crown Point Forts nearing Completion        12

  Front View of Rodin Bust “La France”                              18

  Steamship “France” that transported French Delegation             26

  Banquet to French Delegation, Waldorf-Astoria, May 1, 1912        30

  Governor John A. Mead of Vermont                                  42

  Ferry Transporting Commissioners and French Delegation            70

  Ambassador Jusserand and French Delegation at Crown Point         72

  Commissioners and French Delegation at Crown Point Forts          72

  French Delegation at Crown Point Memorial, May 3, 1912            74

  M. Hanotaux speaking at Crown Point Forts, May 3, 1912            76

  M. Hanotaux speaking at Crown Point Memorial, May 3, 1912         76

  Landing Troops and Guests at Crown Point Forts, July 5, 1912     120

  Colonel Sanger, Governor Dix and others landing at Crown Point   120

  Unveiling Tablet at Fort Amherst, July 5, 1912                   126

  Tablet unveiled at Fort Amherst, July 5, 1912                    128

  Colonel Sanger, Governor Dix and Staff approaching Memorial,
    July 5, 1912                                                   132

  Champlain Memorial Lighthouse, July 5, 1912                      134

  Governor John A. Dix speaking at Crown Point Memorial,
    July 5, 1912                                                   136

  Colonel William C. Sanger speaking at Crown Point Memorial       140

  Adjutant-General Verbeck, Count and Countess de Peretti de
    la Rocca                                                       142

  Parade in Plattsburgh, July 6, 1912, escorted by 5th U. S.
    Infantry                                                       158

  Governor Dix, Lieutenant-Governor Conway, Colonel Cowles,
    Commissioners Knapp and Riley                                  158

  Governor John A. Dix                                             162

  Miss Katharine M. Booth, unveiling the Memorial at Plattsburgh   164

  Front View and Granite Approach of Memorial at Plattsburgh       164

  Governor John A. Dix speaking at Plattsburgh, July 6, 1912       166

  Group Picture of Commissioners Knapp, Hill, Witherbee, Frawley
    and Foley                                                      216

  Group Picture of Commissioners Pell, Riley, Lafontaine, Booth,
    Shea and Weaver                                                216

  Charles Alexander Nelson, Indexer                                262




                                 The

                      Tercentenary Celebration

                               of the

                     Discovery of Lake Champlain




Part One

MEMORIALS TO SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN




I. CONSTRUCTION OF MEMORIALS TO SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN


The first Report of this Commission was presented to the Honorable
the Legislature of the State of New York, September 19, 1911.
Subsequently thereto Commissioner and Senator James A. Foley, while
still an Assemblyman, introduced a bill in the Assembly designed to
empower the Commission to build two suitable permanent memorials to
Samuel Champlain in that valley, one at Crown Point Forts and the
other at Plattsburgh. Commissioner and Senator James J. Frawley had
charge of the bill in the Senate. It was also designed to extend the
term of the Commission into the year 1913, long enough to complete
such memorials and to dedicate them with appropriate ceremonies. That
bill passed the Legislature and upon its approval by Governor Dix, it
became chapter 273 of the Laws of 1912. By its terms, it imposed on
the Commission the duty of submitting to the Legislature of 1913, a
full and complete report of its proceedings and transactions.

On March 27, 1912, the New York Lake Champlain Tercentenary
Commission submitted its Financial Report to the Legislature, showing
its receipts and disbursements down to March 26, 1912. These two
reports of the Commission, already submitted to the Legislature,
comprise all the proceedings and transactions of the Commission down
to their respective dates, so that all that is necessary to do in
this Final Report is to continue the record of its proceedings and
transactions from such dates. This will include an account of the
visit to this country of the distinguished French delegation, headed
by His Excellency, Monsieur Albert Auguste Gabriel Hanotaux in April
and May, 1912,—an event exponential of the perfect amity existing
between the two Republics—and also an account of the dedicatory
ceremonies of the Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point Forts, New York,
on July 5, 1912, and of the Champlain memorial at Plattsburgh, New
York, on July 6, 1912.

These did not admit of so extensive an historical treatment of
the important events occurring in the Champlain valley, nor of
so wide a range of literary productions, as did the Tercentenary
exercises, a record of which may be found in the First Report of this
Commission. Nevertheless, the interchange of felicitations between
the representatives of France and of this country, the cordial
greetings everywhere extended to the French visitors and the amicable
relations existing between the two peoples, prompting the warmest
expressions of good will and generous impulses in addresses of rare
literary quality, together with the dedicatory ceremonies themselves,
are worthy a permanent record in this Final Report, thereby enlarging
it into a volume, and are a fitting sequel to the historical
Tercentenary Celebration.

The Commissioners fully realized the opportunity at Crown Point
Forts for the construction and embellishment of a great Memorial
Lighthouse to commemorate the advent of Samuel Champlain, the herald
of civilization, into that valley, and they spared no pains to
accomplish that result.

After examining some American memorials to Samuel Champlain and
looking over the photographs of others and especially in view of the
utilitarian character of the Crown Point memorial in the form of a
Lighthouse and of its adaptability to sculptural embellishment, the
Commissioners decided to undertake the production of such a Memorial
after a design submitted by the architects, Messrs. Dillon, McLellan
& Beadel of New York City, including a bronze statue group, the work
of the sculptor, Carl Augustus Heber, of New York City. For three
years, Mr. Heber was in the studios of Augustus St. Gaudens and Paul
Bartlett in Paris and afterward worked on the embellishments of the
Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo under Karl Theodore Francis Bitter.

Among Heber’s more important works are the equestrian statue of
General Sheridan at Somerset, Ohio; the statue of Franklin at
Princeton University; the Schiller at Rochester, N. Y., the heroic
statue “Roman Poet” in the Brooklyn Institute, and the bronze statue
in St. Andrew’s Church at Stamford, Connecticut. He received a medal
at the St. Louis Exposition for his “Pastoral” which is now in the
museum of the Chicago Art Institute, and he won the Avery prize at
the Architectural League in 1910.

Contracts were let to Booth Brothers and Hurricane Isle Granite
Company for the construction of the Memorial Lighthouse on the
property of the United States at Crown Point Forts of Fox Island
granite according to the design found at pages 346-347 of the
original Report of the Commission and for the bronze statue group
after the Heber model, consisting of a bronze statue of Champlain
with one of his soldiers crouching at his feet at one side and an
Indian at the other. Just below the group is a conventionalized
stone canoe prow laden with the products of the country. The work
progressed as rapidly as was planned. The Fox Island granite came
from the State of Maine and had to be delivered at Crown Point Forts,
several miles distant from a railroad station. The memorial was
practically completed on July 5, 1912, although the foundry work on
the bronze statue group was not finished, but was in place before the
close of navigation. The Commissioners are gratified that the entire
memorial, including granite and bronze work, and architects’ fees,
was completed within the contract price of approximately $51,313.83,
and has been generally approved by the Governors of New York and
Vermont and by all others who have passed judgment upon it. In the
production of such memorials, where æsthetics must be combined with
utilitarian purposes, not readily susceptible of artistic treatment,
it is not to be determined _a priori_ from plans, what the result
may be and especially when so much depends upon the location and
landscape surroundings, as in the case of this memorial.

The artistic features of this memorial with its group of bronze
statuary, with the Rodin allegorical bust “La France” set in its
granite base, with eight free standing Doric columns surrounding its
central shaft, supporting a visitors’ gallery, that gives a wide
outlook over the lake and above that, a lantern platform 50 feet
from the ground, all surmounted by a circular capital with the
garlands of the frieze binding the top together rising 73 feet above
the circular terrace and 101 feet above the level of the lake and in
the main after the style of the architecture prevailing in France at
the time of Champlain, are rather accentuated by the grandeur of the
natural scenery surrounding it, produced by the rugged Adirondacks
in the west, the long expanse of undulating waters in the north,
historic Chimney Point, the fertile fields, green vales and receding
mountains in the east and the majestic ivy-clad ruins in the south,
all under an azure vault of sky, “glorious as the gates of Heaven.”
This memorial of highly artistic design with surroundings of such
natural beauty and sublimity and nearly “throned among the hills”
cannot fail to make an impression on the imagination and to produce a
pleasing effect upon the mind, which is said by Sir Joshua Reynolds
to be “the end of art.”

[Illustration: Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point]

[Illustration: Champlain Group at Crown Point Memorial]

Inscriptions on the two granite pyramids are the following:

                         (_Western pyramid_)
                               NEW YORK
                            LAKE CHAMPLAIN
                             TERCENTENARY
                              COMMISSION

                      GOVERNOR CHARLES E. HUGHES
                         GOVERNOR JOHN A. DIX
                           H. WALLACE KNAPP
                            HENRY W. HILL
                         WALTER C. WITHERBEE
                           JAMES J. FRAWLEY
                              JAMES SHEA
                          WILLIAM R. WEAVER
                            JAMES A. FOLEY
                            JOHN H. BOOTH
                            JOHN B. RILEY
                         LOUIS C. LAFONTAINE
                             HOWLAND PELL

                         (_Eastern pyramid_)

                               VERMONT
                            LAKE CHAMPLAIN
                             TERCENTENARY
                              COMMISSION


                      GOVERNOR GEORGE H. PROUTY
                        GOVERNOR JOHN A. MEAD
                             LYNN M. HAYS
                            FRANK L. FISH
                          WALTER H. CROCKETT
                           HORACE W. BAILEY
                           GEORGE T. JARVIS
                            JOHN M. THOMAS
                        WILLIAM J. VAN PATTEN
                           ARTHUR F. STONE
                         FREDERICK O. BEAUPRE


               THE CHILDREN OF VERMONT PARTICIPATED IN
              THE ERECTION OF THIS MONUMENT IN HONOR OF
                           SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN


The following _arms_ appear on the base of the monument, in following
order from front to rear:

  (_East side_)

  Arms of “La Compagnie de la Nouvelle France.”
  Arms of the State of Vermont.
  Arms of France of the time of Louis XIII.

  (_West side_)

  Arms of the United States.
  Arms of the State of New York.
  Arms of Brouage. (Birthplace of Champlain.)

Inscription on bronze tablet on the base of the Lighthouse, below the
statue of Champlain and the Rodin bust:

              +--------------------------------------+
              | 1609     TO THE MEMORY OF       1909 |
              |          SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN            |
              |         INTREPID NAVIGATOR           |
              |         SCHOLARLY EXPLORER           |
              |         CHRISTIAN PIONEER            |
              | ERECTED BY THE STATE OF NEW YORK AND |
              |       THE STATE OF VERMONT           |
              | IN COMMEMORATION OF HIS DISCOVERY OF |
              |       THE LAKE WHICH BEARS HIS NAME  |
              +--------------------------------------+

A description of the Rodin bust and the illustrations of this
memorial may be found elsewhere in this volume. It was erected under
the supervision of Commissioners Walter C. Witherbee, Howland Pell,
James Shea, Louis C. Lafontaine and the chairman, Hon. H. Wallace
Knapp. The Legislature authorized the construction of two permanent
memorials to Samuel Champlain in the Champlain valley by chapter 181
of the Laws of 1911. The Commissioners appointed to supervise the
construction of the Champlain memorial at Plattsburgh, were Judge
John B. Riley, Judge John H. Booth, Senator James A. Foley and Hon.
William R. Weaver, together with the chairman, the Hon. H. Wallace
Knapp. They employed Messrs. Dillon, McLellan & Beadel to design the
Plattsburgh memorial, the same architects who designed the Crown
Point Memorial. Carl Augustus Heber was employed as the sculptor for
the Plattsburgh Champlain Statue. The city of Plattsburgh purchased
a commanding site for the memorial on the north shore of the harbor,
below the outlet of the Saranac river overlooking Cumberland Bay and
Lake Champlain.

[Illustration: Memorial to Samuel Champlain at Plattsburgh]

[Illustration: Side View of the Champlain Memorial at Plattsburgh,
N. Y.

Copyrighted and by the courtesy of the Powers Engraving Co. of New York]

The Plattsburgh memorial has been described by the architects as
follows:


DESCRIPTION

The Plattsburgh memorial to Samuel Champlain consists of a statue and
pedestal standing on a terrace in a park overlooking Lake Champlain.
The Terrace is bordered by a granite coping, and a flight of steps
leads down to the lake.

The pedestal is square, slightly tapering toward the top. It is
twenty-two feet high, and built of Massachusetts pink granite.
It stands on a platform two steps above the terrace. Its base is
surrounded by a granite seat and ornamented in front by the figure of
a crouching Indian with bow and shield, carved in granite; at each
side by a canoe prow with trophies typical of America in Champlain’s
time; and at the rear by a bronze tablet bearing the names of the
Commissioners.

The canoe prows were chosen because the birch bark canoe is one of
the highest achievements, both constructively and artistically, of
any primitive race, and is typical of Eastern North America. Strongly
and ingeniously made of materials found in the woods, seaworthy,
capable of carrying a heavy load, and so light that it could easily
be carried from one waterway to another, it provided the quickest
and easiest means of travel for the Indians and for the explorers of
this part of the country. Without its assistance, journeys such as
Champlain’s would have been vastly more difficult, if not impossible.

The type is fast disappearing with our forests, so it seems fitting
to perpetuate it in stone on the monument to Champlain, to whom it
was of such service.

The upper part of the pedestal is decorated with carved garlands of
Indian corn, and bears the following inscription on the front and
back respectively:

  _(Front)_

  Samuel
  Champlain
  1567     1635
  Navigator
  Discoverer
  Colonizer

  _(Rear)_

  Erected by
  The State of
  New York in
  Commemoration
  of the
  Discovery of
  Lake Champlain
  1609          1909

  _(Inscription on Bronze Tablet on Rear)_

  LAKE CHAMPLAIN TERCENTENARY COMMISSION
  STATE OF NEW YORK

  GOV. CHARLES E. HUGHES.
  H. WALLACE KNAPP
  HENRY W. HILL
  WALTER C. WITHERBEE
  JAMES J. FRAWLEY
  JAMES SHEA
  GOV. JOHN A. DIX
  WILLIAM R. WEAVER
  JAMES A. FOLEY
  JOHN H. BOOTH
  JOHN B. RILEY
  LOUIS C. LAFONTAINE
  HOWLAND PELL

The statue of Champlain, which is nearly twelve feet high and of
bronze, represents him in his soldier costume holding in his hand
the arquebuse of which he speaks in his memoirs. This and his
breastplate, helmet or morion, cloak, doublet, boots, and sword
follow carefully the style of his period: the arquebuse, morion and
sword being modelled after the ancient pieces in the collection of
Hon. Howland Pell.

The monument was designed by Dillon, McLellan & Beadel, the
architects of the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point Forts,
and the sculpture was done by Carl A. Heber, who modelled the Crown
Point memorial figures.

[Illustration: Champlain Statue at Plattsburgh]

[Illustration: Crouching Indian at Base of Champlain Statue at
Plattsburgh]

Contracts were let to Booth Brothers and Hurricane Isle Granite
Company for the granite work of the Plattsburgh Memorial, which was
to be built of Massachusetts pink granite and also for the bronze
tablet, steps, coping, etc., and to Carl A. Heber, the sculptor
for the bronze statue of Champlain and for the models of the Indian,
canoe prow and garlands. The approximate cost of the entire memorial,
including architects’ fees, was $20,263.51. This memorial was
completed in time for dedication on July 6, 1912. It is a stately and
dignified memorial after an original design, about 34 feet high and
rising 61½ feet above the level of the lake, and so located as to be
readily seen from the decks of passenger steamers entering the port
of Plattsburgh. As a work of art, it will stand comparison with any
of the memorials to Samuel Champlain in this country.

[Illustration: Champlain Memorial at Crown Point Forts Nearing
Completion]




II. THE ALLEGORICAL BUST, “LA FRANCE,” AND THE PERSONNEL AND MISSION
OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION


As the memorials neared completion, it was learned through His
Excellency, Jean Adrien Antoine Jules Jusserand, the French
Ambassador, that His Excellency, Clément Armand Fallières, President
of the Republic of France, and the French people were raising
funds to purchase and present to the Lake Champlain Tercentenary
Commissions, which was to become a part of the Champlain memorial
at Crown Point Forts, an allegorical bust by one of their noted
sculptors. The cordial relations existing between the people of
France and the people of America, as a result of the Champlain
Tercentenary Celebration, awakened in the two peoples something
of that friendship, which naturally springs from the pursuit of
common purposes, similar ideals and like humanitarian impulses. The
Tercentenary tributes to the God-fearing Champlain, whose noble
qualities of mind and heart and whose unrequited services to mankind
afford the occasion for the intermingling of the two races and the
interchange of expressions of good will and cordial greetings,
touched the hearts of the French people as nothing else had done,
since the time when the people of this country bestowed their
tributes on that other distinguished Frenchman and patriot, Marquis
de Lafayette, whose services to this nation have ever since provoked
the praises of our countrymen. This appears from what followed.

Through the columns of _Le Figaro_ of December 22, 1911, His
Excellency, Albert Auguste Gabriel Hanotaux, of the French Academy
and President of the Franco-American Committee, which assumed the
undertaking of procuring the Rodin allegorical bust, “La France,”
appealed to the people of France to support the Committee in its
undertaking. In the course of this appeal (rendered into English), he
said:

  Of the three names (Champlain, Jacques de Liniers and F. de
  Lesseps), perhaps the greatest is that of Champlain. He was at
  once both founder and originator. Canada owes its existence to
  him. Quebec celebrated three years ago the memory of the man who
  having full consciousness of what he did placed the first stone
  of the French metropolis in America. He had also “great plans and
  vast thoughts.” A man of action, he was a man of imagination. He
  dreamed of the establishment for the benefit of France, of an
  immense dominion covering the American continent from Canada to
  Louisiana and Florida, through the valley of the Mississippi. This
  was neither more nor less than the idea of the future Republic of
  the United States, but in Champlain’s thought it was a matter of a
  French America. On the very first page of his book (now so rare and
  so much sought for by book-lovers), a book which he dedicated to
  the Cardinal Richelieu, the only one capable of comprehending him,
  Champlain explains his thought in terms of thrilling clearness.
  “It is necessary,” he wrote in 1632, “that under the reign of King
  Louis the Just, France beholds herself enriched with a country, the
  extent of which exceeds sixteen hundred leagues in length and more
  than five hundred in width, and that in a continent which leaves
  nothing to be desired in the bounty of its lands and in the profit
  which can be drawn from them, both for foreign commerce and for the
  delights of life therein. The communication of the great rivers
  and lakes, which are like seas stretching across these countries,
  affords so great facility for all discoverers in the remote regions
  that one can go to the seas of the west, of the east, of the far
  north, or even to the south.” When I cited this same page in 1898,
  I added: “Sixteen hundred leagues by five hundred! These are
  proportions over which one can now labor only in Africa.”

  No doubt the great cities which will one day grow up on the banks
  of the Sangha, of the Oubanghi, and of the Congo, will celebrate
  Brazza, even as the United States prepare to glorify Champlain.

  Some months ago our Ambassador at Washington, M. J. J. Jusserand,
  called the attention of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
  frequency of French commemorations in the United States. He
  mentioned especially the approaching erection on the borders of
  Lake Champlain of a monument consecrated to the memory of our
  compatriot and he asked the Government to act so that France
  would not be “absent” from these exercises so honorable to her.
  The Minister of Foreign Affairs laid the matter before the
  Franco-American Committee, who in turn makes its appeal to the
  public.

  It is not desirable, indeed it is not proper that France absolutely
  ignore what is being done for her. Can she forget past services?
  Nations have the right to be ungrateful, but they cannot neglect
  courtesies—that would be inexcusable. A lack of good manners is
  worse than a fault. Since North America, or, to speak more exactly,
  the states of New York and Vermont, wish to remember, would we not
  be obstinate to forget?

  The monument under construction is admirably adapted to the place
  and to the claims of the man, which it is designed to celebrate.
  There is at the extremity of the lake discovered by Champlain, and
  which bears his name, a lighthouse, throwing its rays over the
  waters of which, he, first of Europeans, contemplated the immense
  extent, empty and wild, and which are now traversed by the fleet
  of great steamboats, the region peopled by a swarm of men. A solid
  mass of masonry, a crown of columns bearing a terrace, and above
  all the lantern of the lighthouse, these are from base to summit
  the members of this powerful architecture. From the mass of masonry
  rises a rostrum, beneath which Champlain stands like a pilot.

  What can France do? What should she do? What stone worthy of her
  can she bring to the monument? There is but one solution. It
  is that this stone must be precious.... We are at the house of
  Rodin. It is known how popular his name is in America. The great
  sculptor whose renown extends over the world has nowhere more
  ardent admirers. We hasten through the great rooms of the Hotel
  Biron. These great bare halls, full of the genius from which
  administrative barbarism is undertaking to shut out the glory,
  and among so many masterpieces where admiration exhausts itself,
  we discover (that is the true word, for the remarkable modesty of
  the master scarcely pointed it out to us) a bronze bust: _France_.
  Imagine the emotion of this finding! We sought an image, a symbol,
  I may say a signature of our country, to send out there and we find
  France herself, a darling France, full of grace, of spirit and of
  courage; a young French woman to the sensitive nostrils, to the
  full cheeks; to the chin, delicate and obstinate, to the glance,
  loyal, headstrong and brave; a young woman in whom are summed up
  our Clotilde, our Blanche, our Henriette and our Jeanne, crowned
  with her tresses as with a helmet, armed with her attire as with
  a cuirass. We sought for a French conception and we find the very
  image of France. It is this figure we wish to send out there, that
  it may be placed near the monument of Champlain. In front of the
  mass of masonry, a light construction, an “edicule,” which will
  be like a stone shrine sheltering and isolating the bust. And
  thus French art will carry its offering simply and beautifully,
  associating it with the powerful American commemoration.

  If the idea appears good and worthy, worthy of the Government and
  of the Embassy, which has been confided to us, worthy of the man
  who was three centuries ago the champion of our country, worthy of
  the sister republic, then it is necessary that friends sign this
  visiting-card which will be sent out there in her name.

  The inauguration of the monument will take place next July. A
  French delegation will go to deliver Rodin’s bronze to the building
  committee. Time presses. We must be ready by the day named. The
  bronze which requires some alterations will be quickly completed.
  But it is further necessary that the architect place the edicule,
  that they cut the stone, that they engrave it in order that the
  thought of the master make in the ensemble a delicate, proud work,
  a flower of France, blossoming in good art at the foot of the
  colossal monument.

  A little money is needed. But above all is needed a prompt
  expression to prevent at once any fault of taste and lack of
  precision. The _Figaro_ opens its columns to us. The _Times_,
  the _Matin_, the Parisian press aid us. To-day appears the first
  subscription list. We make appeal to the friends of America and to
  the friends of France, that it may be rapidly closed up.

To this patriotic appeal generous response was made and the bust
was secured. On April 26, 1912, the French delegation on their
superb steamship _France_ of La Compagnie Générale Transatlantique
in New York harbor was welcomed by members of the New York Lake
Champlain Tercentenary Commission, Viscount de Jean, Secretary of
the French Embassy at Washington, M. Étienne Marie Louis Lanel,
French Consul-General at New York, Paul Fuller, Jr., representing
the Franco-American Committee, Hon. McDougall Hawkes, representing
the Franco-American Institute in the United States, and Mr. Henry
L. Beadel, one of the architects of the Champlain Memorials. The
interchange of greetings between the members of the Tercentenary
Commission and the visitors prepared the way for the receptions
that were to follow at New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Boston,
Montreal, Quebec, and elsewhere. The delegation was accompanied by
Hon. Robert Bacon, former United States Ambassador to France, and was
one of the most representative that had ever come over from France.
It included in its membership:

His Excellency, Albert Auguste Gabriel Hanotaux, of the French
Academy, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, President of the
delegation; Hon. Louis Barthou, Member of the Chamber of Deputies,
former Minister of Justice; Baron D’Estournelles de Constant, Member
of the French Senate and of The Hague International Tribunal; M.
René Bazin of the French Academy; General Lebon, Grand Officer of
the Legion of Honor and Member of the Superior Council of War; M.
Étienne Lamy of the French Academy; M. Fernand Cormon, painter,
President of the Academy of Fine Arts; Count Charles de Chambrun,
Secretary of the French Embassy at Washington, representing President
Poincaré of the Council of Ministers; M. Paul Vidal de le Blache,
Member of the Institute, representing the University of Paris; Le
Duc Choiseul, descendant of an old distinguished French family;
Count de Rochambeau, descendant of Count de Rochambeau, in command
of the French forces in America during the Revolution; M. J. Dal
Piaz, Director-General of La Compagnie Générale Transatlantique; M.
Louis Blériot, Engineer and Aviator; M. Antoine Girard, Commercial
Explorer; M. Léon Barthou, delegate from the Aero Club of France; M.
Gabriel Louis Jaray, Member of the Council of State and Secretary
of the General Franco-American Committee; M. Gaston Deschamps,
representing “_Le Temps_;” M. Régis Gignoux, representing “_Le
Figaro_;” M. Roger Gouel, Secretary of the delegation; the Countess
de Rochambeau; Madame Blériot; Miss Valentine Girard and Miss
Madeline Cormon.

Baron D’Estournelles de Constant, so favorably known to Americans on
account of his advocacy of International Peace on a former visit to
this country, introduced the members of the delegation to members
of the New York Commission, which presented to each visitor one of
the official souvenir Champlain badges and later a copy of the first
edition of the Official Report of the Tercentenary Celebration. The
mission of the delegation was to bring and present to the New York
and Vermont Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commissions the allegorical
bust “La France,” by Auguste Rodin, bearing the following inscription:

             LE XX JUILLET MDCIX LE FRANÇAIS S. CHAMPLAIN
                A DÉCOUVERT LE LAC QUI PORTE SON NOM.
                    LE III MAI MCMXII LES ÉTATS DE
                        NEW-YORK ET DE VERMONT
                         ÉLEVANT CE MONUMENT
                       UNE DÉLÉGATION FRANÇAISE
                       A SCELLE CETTE FIGURE DE
                             “LA FRANCE.”

A. Rodin

The architects of the Crown Point memorial thus described the bust:

The plaque represents France with a head-dress that follows somewhat
the form of a liberty cap, and is half-indicated as the skin of
a cock. A claw and a comb seem almost discernible in the boldly
modelled planes and ridges. “La France” herself is a young woman
with a strong face. The nose is modelled in a few bold planes, and
is large. The eyes are staring and archaic. The mouth is firm, but
is more kindly modelled than the nose, and the chin and cheeks
are rounded, and, though firm, more feminine than the rest of the
countenance. The pose is alert, even aggressive. It is too masculine
to be immediately attractive, but familiarity with it seems to subdue
its harshness and bring out its charm, until it is seen to possess
that indescribable quality of mystery that belongs to a few famous
portraits.

M. Hanotaux said that “it was fit to replace the Mona Lisa.” Perhaps
he is right. There is no doubt at least that it is the work of a
master. It has been placed on the front of the pedestal that carries
the statue of Champlain.


ALLEGORICAL INTERPRETATION.

[Suggested by Henry W. Hill, Secretary of the Commission.]

In addition to the foregoing technical description, this
_chef-d’œuvre_ may also have another interpretation, for it was
designed to symbolize France, through the transformation of ten
centuries of turbulence, revolution and evolution, the center of
the Republican movement in Europe and finally emerging triumphantly
reconstructed and self-reliant, the exponent among Continental
nations of the liberty, equality and fraternity of mankind. In her
new Renaissance of constitutional government, the spirit of intense
patriotism has taken possession of her people and France is another
illustration of the solidarity of those communities and stability
of those nations, which are actuated by and founded upon popular
liberties.

[Illustration: Front View of Rodin Bust “La France”]

In contemplating this work, we are made to realize that the French
as well as the Italians have an intuitive appreciation of the ideals
in æsthetics and they are setting the standards of their ideals
in art so high, that France as well as Italy is leading most other
nations in artistic achievement as may be seen in the marvelous
productions of her modern sculptors, whose works are not only found
in the Louvre, the Musée du Luxembourg and in other collections, but
also adorn the palaces, boulevards and public grounds of Paris and
other municipalities of France.

The moderate encouragement given there to art by the state and
the people of the country has undoubtedly stimulated original
and creative production in sculpture as well as in painting,
notwithstanding the apathy once described by Théodore Duret, who
declared that “there is nothing sadder to recount in the whole
history of art than the persecution inflicted upon truly original
and creative artists of the country.” In this martyrdom of those
devoted to æsthetic achievements the world over inheres the truth of
the Roman adage, _patitur qui vincit_. Auguste Rodin, who was born
in Paris in 1840 and elected President of the International Society
of Sculptors, Painters and Engravers in 1904, has conquered and
lives to see his works admired in both hemispheres, notwithstanding
his disregard of the canons and conventionalities of the French
Institute, which were repulsive to him. He has devoted himself to
a mastery of nature, as zealously as did Michael Angelo to the
study of anatomy. He is original and creative and his works are now
appreciated by members of the Institute as well as by the savants
in art the world over. His success in his field of sculptural
achievement is largely due to his intense application to nature, as
interpreted through the perspective of a vivid imagination, a poetic
temperament and a keen appreciation of the beautiful and the sublime.
These have impelled him to reject the conventional details, due to
uniform rules applying to all alike, regardless of the individual
characteristics, apparent in the works of many sculptors and to
devote himself to productions, which are the embodiment of individual
realism. In “La France,” one appreciates that he has produced a work
with an exuberance of detail as stately as the Greek conception of
the ideal head, shown in the marble copy of the Athene Parthenos
of Phidias. It is a production of marked originality and has the
character and the strength of the works of Donatello and of Michael
Angelo, which contain “infinitely subtle shades of form in each
sinuosity of contour” and are suggestive of living personalities.
Whether or not we accept the intuitional theory of æsthetics,
propounded by Benedetto Croce and others, that beauty is spiritual
activity or expression and nothing more and is not predicable of
nature apart from expression, we cannot fail to appreciate that the
works of Rodin,[1] which are true to nature or an improvement upon
it, are illustrations of perfect æsthetic expression and therefore
fall within Signore Croce’s category of æsthetic productions.

The allegorical bust, “La France,” a work of poetic symbolism,
reveals something of the culture and the contemplative character
and native resolution of that nation, which struggles and conquers
and whose intellectual development—through the various stages of a
complex and progressive civilization, broadened by the discovery
of her navigators and the assumption of the responsibility of
colonial government of her own and alien races, ameliorated by the
responsiveness of her statesmen to popular ideas, thus solving the
perplexing problems of organization and administration, enlightened
by the brilliant achievements of her scientists and of her
littérateurs, ennobled by the ethical teachings of her philosophers
and uplifted by the inspiration of her poets and by the marvelous
creations of her sculptors, her painters and her architects—is
the fruition of that universal genius, which is regenerating and
immortal. This has enabled France to maintain a leading position in
the onward march of civilization and to mold her institutions in
conformity to the world’s approved ethical and political standards.

It is not necessary to enumerate her contributions to art, to
literature or to science further than to call attention to the
fact that her celebrated Pierre Simonde de Laplace was the first
to unfold the Nebular Hypothesis in his “Exposition du Système du
Monde” to account for the formation of the solar system, and that
her Charles Messier was the first to catalogue stationary objects
so faint as to be hardly observable through his small telescope and
by him first named “nebulae.” The diaphanous, spiral convolutions
in such of these, as the great green nebula in Orion, the brilliant
white nebula in Andromeda and the whirlpool nebula in Canes Venatici,
by the aid of powerful telescopes, may now be photographed and by
the revelations of the spectroscope, their dimensions, character and
composition may be determined.

If these nebulae, first discovered by Messier, be distant universes,
not unlike the Milky Way, as suggested by Dr. Edward Arthur Fath,
who estimates the diameter of the nebula in Andromeda at thirty-five
trillions of miles, we at most have but little conception of their
magnitude and the wonders of the realms of infinite space about us.
The contributions of Laplace and Messier as well as of Lalande,
Leverrier and others to astronomy indicate to some extent the
leading position France has always taken in the domain of science
and original research. All nations recognize that _La France est la
patrie des sciences et des arts_.

Her contributions to civilization and to the world’s diplomacy
entitle her to the gratitude of other civilized nations.

The people of this nation are especially grateful to France for
her services in opening up the heart of this continent to its
early settlers, for her assistance to our people in their struggle
for independence and for other acts of friendship, gratefully
acknowledged elsewhere in this Report, the last of which is
beautifully expressed in the gift of the Rodin bust, “La France.”




III. SOCIAL FUNCTIONS AND HOSPITALITIES EXTENDED TO THE FRENCH
VISITORS IN NEW YORK, WASHINGTON, PHILADELPHIA, BOSTON AND ELSEWHERE


Upon their disembarkation, the visitors took rooms in the Hotel
Vanderbilt. In the evening, they witnessed “Les Fourberies de Scapin”
of Molière, played by the students of French in the College of the
City of New York at the Carnegie Lyceum, and also the French version
of an English play. On April 27, 1912, Mayor Gaynor received the
delegation in the City Hall of New York and expressed his pleasure
at their safe arrival in the city. M. Hanotaux replied that it was
an honor to present their respects to the first citizen of the great
city of New York. On the same day, members of the French delegation
and members of the Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commissions were
tendered a luncheon at the Metropolitan Club in New York by Hon.
McDougall Hawkes, chairman of the American Board of the French
Institute in the United States. Mr. Hawkes in a graceful address
welcomed the guests and extended an invitation to the First Loan
Exhibit of the Institute that afternoon. In the course of his address
he said:

  Your visit, Mons. Hanotaux, with other distinguished delegates from
  France, who have come on so flattering and pleasing a mission, will
  constitute a strong landmark in what has been so interestingly
  termed by the distinguished librarian of the city of Paris,
  Marcel Poëte, the intellectual expansion of France in the United
  States. This so-called expansion, based on intellectual relations
  between the two countries, is in fact a natural corollary to other
  relations, which for more than three centuries and a half, have
  inclined each towards the other in common sympathies. (Applause.)

He was followed by Ambassador Jusserand, Mayor Gaynor, Baron
D’Estournelles de Constant, M. Louis Barthou, Mr. Paul Fuller, who
spoke in French, and others. At the Loan Exposition that followed
in the East Gallery of the building of the American Arts Society,
John W. Alexander, President of the National Academy of Design and
a Trustee of the French Institute in the United States, in a brief
address spoke of the cordial reception given in France to students of
art from this country and welcomed the delegation in a most cordial
manner to the Institute. M. Fernand Cormon, President of the Fine
Arts Academy of France, expressed his thanks for the cordial welcome
they had received and declared that

  such occasions as the opening of the Museum of French Art in
  this country would do much to bring artists of the two countries
  into closer communication and would multiply the means and the
  occasions, through which Americans and the French could better know
  and appreciate one another. For this good work, which has been so
  auspiciously begun to-day, you will have our active co-operation
  and I extend to you our sincere thanks. (Applause.)

On the following morning the members of the French delegation and
the members of the Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commissions were
received by former Senator William A. Clark at his Fifth Avenue home
and shown through his unique and valuable art collections, in which
the visitors expressed deep interest. They were surprised to find so
extensive and rare a collection in private hands, and congratulated
Senator Clark upon his acquisition and possession of it.

Members of the delegation took the afternoon train for Washington,
where they were met by Mr. Chandler Hale, Third Assistant Secretary
of State, an aide-de-camp of the President, and Count de Peretti de
la Rocca, Counsellor to the French Ambassador. On April 29th they
were accompanied by Secretary of War, Henry L. Stimson, Major-General
Leonard Wood, General Oliver and others on the _Dolphin_ to Mount
Vernon, where M. Hanotaux on behalf of his compatriots placed a
wreath of flowers on the tomb of President Washington.

[Illustration: Steamship France, that Transported French Delegation
with Rodin Bust from France to New York

By courtesy of Byron, N. Y. City]

On their return to Washington, Ambassador and Mme. Jusserand tendered
them a reception at the French Embassy, which was attended by the
diplomatic corps and others, and later the National Press Club also
gave them a reception. In the evening Ambassador and Mrs. Jusserand
gave them a dinner at the French Embassy, which was followed by a
ball given by Mr. John Barrett at the Pan-American Building.

On Tuesday morning, April 30th, they visited the Congressional
Library, the Supreme Court, the Senate and the House of
Representatives and were then entertained at luncheon at the White
House by President and Mrs. Taft, where informal expressions of good
will concluded the Washington visit.

They returned to New York in the afternoon and were given a reception
and dinner by La Compagnie Générale Transatlantique on board the
new steamship _France_, said to be one of the most artistically
decorated vessels that ever entered the harbor of New York and
flying the largest American flag ever unfurled from the masthead of
any vessel, the gift of Ambassador Robert Bacon to this ship on her
maiden voyage. Members of the Champlain Tercentenary Commissions
were also guests at the dinner, at which M. Paul Faguet, general
agent of the company, presided. Among the speakers were M. J. Dal
Piaz, director-general of the company, Ambassador Jusserand, M.
Gabriel Hanotaux and others. Later in the evening, the Society
of the Cincinnati held a reception at the beautiful home of Mr.
and Mrs. Charles B. Alexander at No. 4 West 58th Street, at which
the members of the French delegation and the members of the Lake
Champlain Tercentenary Commissions were guests. On the following
day, some members of the French delegation accompanied by Ambassador
Robert Bacon went to Boston and were met by Prof. W. H. Schofield
of Harvard and William Rotch, president of the Alliance Française
at the south station. They were entertained at breakfast by Prof.
Schofield and at luncheon by President Lowell of Harvard, where they
addressed the students in French. Later in the afternoon they visited
the State House and were presented to Governor Foss. Other members
of the delegation went to Philadelphia, visited the University of
Pennsylvania and Independence Hall, where they saw many portraits
of notable persons, including those of Marquis de Lafayette, Count
de Rochambeau, Count Matthieu Dumas, the general’s aide, and others,
in which they were deeply interested. They were then entertained at
luncheon by the Hon. Charlemagne Tower, former Ambassador to Germany,
and Mrs. Tower, at which luncheon were Dr. and Mrs. S. Weir Mitchell,
Mr. and Mrs. Frank Rosengarten and others.

[Illustration: Banquet to French Delegation at Waldorf-Astoria Hotel,
New York City, May 1, 1912

Copyrighted and by courtesy of Drucker & Co., N. Y. City]




IV. BANQUET AT THE WALDORF-ASTORIA HOTEL, NEW YORK CITY, MAY 1, 1912,
AND PRESENTATION OF RODIN BUST “LA FRANCE”


All the members of the delegation returned to New York in the
afternoon to attend the principal State banquet tendered to
them under the auspices of the Lake Champlain Association and
the Tercentenary Commissions of New York and Vermont at the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in the evening of May 1, 1912. The Astor
gallery of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel where the dinner was served, was
beautifully decorated with flowers and the flags of the two nations,
intertwined, emblematic of the intimate friendship existing between
France and the United States. Elaborate and beautifully designed menu
cards with photographs of the Champlain memorials and with the names
of the French delegation were provided and all other ante-prandial
arrangements had been carefully looked after by the Hon. Frank S.
Witherbee and Percival Wilds, the president and secretary of the
Lake Champlain Association, and by Hon. Howland Pell of the New York
Tercentenary Commission, to all of whom much credit is due for the
success of the banquet.

  *    *    *    *    *    Just in time to banquet
  The illustrious company assembled here.  *  *  *

On the dais were seated thirty-one of the distinguished guests,
including President John H. Finley of the College of the City of
New York, the Toastmaster, Ambassador Jusserand, Attorney-General
George W. Wickersham, representing the President of the United
States, General Horace Porter, former Ambassador to France, Hon.
Robert Bacon, former Ambassador to France, Lieutenant-Governor
Thomas F. Conway, Mayor William J. Gaynor, Hon. A. Barton Hepburn,
members of the French delegation, some members of the Lake Champlain
Tercentenary Commissions and others. The other members of the
Tercentenary Commissions and the other guests were grouped around
thirty-two separate tables, and among them were General Stewart
L. Woodford, former Ambassador to Spain, Governor John A. Mead
of Vermont, Hon. Francis Lynde Stetson, General Charles Davis,
Adjutant-General William Verbeck, Hon. J. G. McCullough, Hon. Frank
S. Witherbee, Hon. Henry W. Taft, Hon. Charles B. Alexander, Hon.
McDougall Hawkes, Hon. William A. Clark, Stephen H. P. Pell, Esq.,
Philip Livingston, T. J. Oakley Rhinelander, Hon. Peter Barlow,
Hon. Francis K. Pendleton, Hon. Rhinelander Waldo, Hon. Bird S.
Coler, A. Eugene Gallatin, Hon. Edward W. Hatch, Hon. Chester B.
McLaughlin, Bashford A. Dean, Esq., Hon. John F. O’Brien, Hon. Darwin
P. Kingsley, Hon. Frederic R. Coudert, Dr. Lewis Francis, Viscount de
Jean, Count Jacques de Portales, Count Henri de Saint Seine, Count
de La Fayette, M. Étienne Marie Louis Lanel, Hon. Edward H. Butler,
William P. Northrup and others.

The three hundred guests represented many of the historic families of
France and America, which had played an important part in the history
of the two countries. It was a notable assemblage and thoroughly
representative of the official life, culture and best citizenship of
the two nations.

After toasts to the President of the United States and to the
President of France, the band played The Star Spangled Banner and La
Marseillaise. Other national airs of France and the United States
interspersed the speeches and were productive of convivial feeling.

President Finley had before him on the table the keystone taken from
over the door of the birthplace of Samuel Champlain in Brouage. It
was encircled by the French flags on the table. His illuminating and
charming articles on “The French in the Heart of America,” commencing
in _Scribner’s Magazine_ for September, 1912, and continuing in
succeeding numbers of that periodical, show the wide extent of the
French settlements in America and something of America’s indebtedness
to France.


ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT JOHN H. FINLEY

  My selection (by those representing the two Champlain Tercentenary
  Commissions and by the Champlain Association, to whose officers
  the success of this great occasion is to be credited)—my selection
  for this office to-night is due to no fitness except the degree
  of my devotion to Champlain and the degree of my personal debt to
  France. So far as I know, I am the only man in New York, if not in
  the United States, who has ever made a pilgrimage to Champlain’s
  birthplace. And no man in America is more grateful to France for
  his own birthplace. It is not permitted me to speak my devotion to
  Champlain and my gratitude to France. I will let this silent stone
  speak for me—this fragment of rock from the coast of France, which
  was once a keystone in the arch over the doorway of the home in
  Brouage in which, by tradition, Champlain was born. I have brought
  it across the sea, in a French vessel, to rebuild it in some
  monument here or in Canada, or between the two countries. To-night
  it is garlanded by flowers grown in America—in tribute to that
  Brouage boy who has made American wildernesses blossom as the rose.
  And I pour upon its face a libation in the wine of the land for
  whose glory he dared, as a man, all perils of sea and land and died
  an exile beneath the gray rock of Quebec, Champlain!

  This stone will speak more effectively than my strange vocabulary,
  the welcome I would give this most distinguished company from
  France to-day. Here is a bit of France, still unnaturalized, that
  will vibrate in all its particles with joy when it hears the voices
  that speak the most beautiful language on earth. (I have only a
  fear that it will disintegrate in its happiness.)

  What I would have this stone say will have eloquent supplement in
  what will be said by those who represent the Nation, the States of
  New York and Vermont and the city of New York. These, gentlemen of
  France, it is my honor to present to you.

  Those explorers, priests and coureurs des bois whom Champlain
  started out into the West gave to the world for all time (and to
  a new nation for some time at least) that most wonderful of all
  the valleys in the world, the Mississippi Valley. And it is a
  noteworthy fact that the three heads of the co-ordinate branches
  of our government come from that valley and from the banks of
  the rivers discovered by the French. The Chief Justice of the
  Supreme Court comes from the River, which Sieur de La Salle with
  Tonty traced to the Gulf of Mexico. The Speaker of the House
  of Representatives comes from the banks of that tumultuous and
  shifting flood known as the Missouri, which Joliet and Marquette
  saw hurling great trees into the Mississippi. And the President
  of the United States comes from the banks of a river of that same
  valley, also discovered, in all probability, by the French,—the
  river along which they planted their plates of discovery, the river
  which they called La Belle Rivière. I propose the health of the
  geographical son of France, the President of the United States,
  who is represented here to-night by a member of his Cabinet,
  Attorney-General Wickersham. (Applause.)

As Dr. Finley poured a few drops of champagne over the stone the
banqueters went to their feet and cheered enthusiastically. President
Finley then presented Attorney-General Wickersham, delegated to
represent the President, who spoke as follows:


ADDRESS OF ATTORNEY-GENERAL GEORGE W. WICKERSHAM

  _Mr. Toastmaster, Mr. Ambassador, Members of the French Delegation,
  Ladies and Gentlemen._—In July, 1909, representatives of France,
  Canada and the United States, and of the several states bordering
  on Lake Champlain, united in celebrating the three hundredth
  anniversary of the discovery of that lake by the great pioneer,
  whose name it bears. That discovery itself was but the occasion for
  a savage combat between the Indians, whom Champlain accompanied
  and the ferocious Iroquois whom they encountered. Only one ray of
  light struggles through the miserable tale of barbaric celebration
  of the victory which the French firearms enabled the Hurons to win
  over their enemies. That ray was the half successful effort made by
  Champlain to check the infliction by his Indian companions of the
  usual fiendish tortures upon their prisoners.

      Je leur remonstrois que nous n’usions point de ces cruautez,
      wrote Champlain in the account of his Journeys (Voyages), et
      que nous les faisions mourir tout d’un coup, et que s’ils
      vouloyent que je luy donnasse un coup d’arquebuse, j’en serois
      content. Ils dirent que non, et qu’il ne sentiroit point de
      mal. Je m’en allay d’avec eux comme fasché de voir tant de
      cruautez qu’ils exercoient sur ce corps. Comme ils virent que
      je n’en estois contant, ils m’appelerent et me dirent que je
      luy donnasse un coup d’arquebuse: ce que je fis, sans qu’il en
      vist rien; et luy fis passer tous les tourmens qu’il devoit
      souffrir, d’un coup, plustost que de la voir tyranniser.
      (Voyages, Oeuvres de Champlain, III, pp. 197-8. Quebec, 1870.)

  (I objected that we did not practice these cruelties, and that we
  killed our enemies with one blow; that I would be content if they
  would let me shoot him with my arquebuse. They said no; that he
  felt no pain. I turned away from them as though angered at such
  cruelty as they were inflicting upon the wretch. Seeing that I
  was vexed, they called me back and said I could shoot him with my
  arquebuse, which I did, without his knowing anything, thus ending
  the agony which he was suffering at one shot, rather than to see
  him further tormented.)

  In all the history of this man we find him the same—brave, simple,
  humane, unselfish; the embodiment of patriotism and piety—an
  example of the finest manly qualities.

  It was, therefore, fitting that in perpetual memory of Samuel
  Champlain there should be erected at the scene of the combat that
  signalized the discovery of this lake—that same Crown Point that
  a century and a quarter later was one of the first places to fall
  before the arms of American colonials in the War of Independence—a
  lighthouse, whose beams shining through the darkness of the night,
  even as the compassion of the good Champlain lightened the path
  of Stygian horrors to the poor suffering savage whose miseries he
  ended, may warn and guide the mariners on those dangerous waters,
  through dark and stormy nights, to the safe haven where they would
  be.

  And it is, therefore, a worthy object that brings this Embassy of
  the French Nation from over seas to install at that lighthouse a
  bronze bas-relief of France, wrought by the hands of one of the
  greatest of living sculptors—that Rodin, whose name is as well
  known in America as in his native country; a token which will
  remain there as an abiding symbol of the intimate part and mighty
  influence which the French people have had in the history and
  development of America.

  How many illustrious French names are written in the history
  of this continent, from the earliest days of struggle with the
  miseries of rigorous climate and savage aborigines, down to the
  cession by Napoleon of the vast territory of Louisiana! What a roll
  of noble names of men who sacrificed all that makes life pleasant,
  in the pursuit of ideals in which no thought of self entered, save
  the hope and vision of that day when they should be greeted with
  the words:

      Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
      you from the foundation of the world.

  The names of Cartier, Le Jeune, Brébeuf, Lalemant, La Salle,
  Joliet, Frontenac, Hennepin, Marquette, Champlain, and many others
  rise before us. But among them all, none is more worthy to be
  remembered than that of Samuel de Champlain. When, in 1640, Père Le
  Jeune visited a place in the country of the Hurons where Champlain
  had stopped longest in a journey he had made there twenty-two years
  before, he recorded that,

      sa reputation vit encore dans l’esprit de ces peuples barbares,
      qui honorent mesme après tant d’années plusieurs belles vertus
      qu’ils admiroient en luy, et particulierement sa chasteté et
      continence envers les femmes.

  (his reputation still lives in the minds of these barbarous
  peoples, who honor, even after so many years, many excellent
  virtues which they admired in him, and in particular his chastity
  and continence with respect to the women).

  And the good Le Jeune exclaims:

      Pleust à Dieu que tous les François qui les premiers sont venus
      en ces contrées lui eussent esté semblables. (Jesuit Relations,
      Vol. XX, p. 18.)

  (Would to God that all the French who came first to this country
  had been like unto him.)

  In 1599, several years before coming to Canada, Champlain visited
  the Isthmus of Panama, and noted that if a canal were cut across
  it one could pass from one ocean to the other, thus shortening
  the distance from Spain to Peru by more than fifteen hundred
  leagues. And as this Frenchman was the first[2] to lay that
  project of the Panama Canal before the world, so another great
  Frenchman, de Lesseps, was the first to put the idea into practical
  application; and after proving that its accomplishment was only
  possible if undertaken by a Government, to hand it over to the
  traditional friend of France,—its successor in the ownership of the
  great territory of Louisiana—to complete the divorcement of the
  continent, which, as Champlain wrote, would divide America into two
  islands: one from Panama to the Straits of Magellan, and the other
  from Panama to the new lands (Terres Noeufves).

  In 1878 we celebrated the centennial anniversary of the Treaty of
  Alliance, and the Treaty of Amity and Commerce, with France.

  In 1903 we celebrated the centennial anniversary of the Treaty of
  Cession of Louisiana.

  In 1904 we concluded the purchase from the French Panama Canal
  Company of its interests in the Isthmian Canal.

  In 1909 we celebrated the three hundredth anniversary of the
  discovery by Champlain of the great lake with which his name is
  forever linked.

  To-night, in the name and on behalf of the President of the United
  States, I welcome the Embassy from the French people that brings
  to the American people a token of the perpetual friendship which
  an indissoluble union in the past makes sure of continuance in the
  future.

  No more distinguished or representative Embassy has ever come
  bearing the greetings of one people to another. Glancing over
  the names of those that comprise it, one sees those of the
  most distinguished exponents of all that is best in French
  national life. History, Literature, Art, Journalism; the cause
  of International Peace, and Arms, which ensure its continuance;
  Industry, Commerce and Sport—all these are represented. To one and
  all of you, America extends a welcome. And in the name, and on
  behalf, of the President of the United States I accept this bronze
  relief of France, which will be erected on the lighthouse at Crown
  Point, as a perpetual reminder of the good will of that people who
  are united with us by the memory of many evidences of disinterested
  friendship in the past and of a common devotion to Republican
  principles in the present. (Applause.)

President Finley then introduced Ambassador Jusserand as follows:

We welcome the special embassies that come from time to time, but
that is partly because of our affection and admiration for the
permanent Ambassador from the Republic of France. It was rumored a
few days ago that he was to be promoted to another court. Of course,
in our opinion transfer to another court is not a promotion. But in
any event, we are sure of this: that court is the most fortunate
to whose sovereign he is accredited. I propose the health of the
sovereign who has accredited him to us, the President of the French
Republic.


ADDRESS OF AMBASSADOR JUSSERAND

  I have been accredited to the United States almost ten years, and
  although this beats the record of any of my predecessors, from the
  founding of this Republic, this space of time, spent in such a
  friendly country, among a people that has never allowed me to feel
  that I was not in my own land, has passed for me like a day. What
  has just been said by our Chairman, an historian, a thinker, a man
  of action, a scientist who has delighted the French of to-day by
  his studies of the French of the past, showing to both a similar
  broad sympathy, touches me deeply. I cannot imagine with the sound
  of his words in my ears, what amount of time would ever seem long
  to me, in a post where the President of the French Republic and his
  representative are spoken of in such a fashion by such a friend.

  It was my privilege, three years ago, to attend, in the society of
  the President of the United States, memorable ceremonies, lasting
  several days, held by the Sons of America in honor of a son of
  France, Samuel Champlain. The year was a busy one for President
  Taft, since it was a tariff year, yet he did not hesitate to lend
  his presence to festivities for which, in every bay, on every
  promontory, in every city, his eloquence, good humor and good grace
  were in ceaseless request. He had been advised that one speech
  would be expected of him, and I had received the same notification;
  so we had each prepared one, but he had to deliver six and I five;
  Ambassador Bryce had a similar fate, such being the way of the
  world, and especially of the New World.

  Many of you, I am sure, remember the grandeur of the ceremonies
  to which a peerless landscape lent its lovely background, and the
  summer sun its splendor, and the Champlain Commission the charms
  of a most gracious hospitality; the visits to Ticonderoga just
  rising from its ruins, to Bluff Point, Plattsburgh, Burlington; the
  excellent addresses of President Taft, of Ambassador Bryce, Senator
  Root, Mr. Lemieux of Canada and so many others, and you remember
  too with what alacrity New York and Vermont vied with each other,
  Governor Hughes and Governor Prouty making everybody welcome and
  delighting innumerable hearers with the wit and wisdom of their
  speeches.

  But this was not enough, and with that warmth of heart so
  characteristic of this nation, you have desired that permanent
  memorials should, to the end of time, bear testimony to the
  gratitude due to Champlain, not only for the discoveries he made,
  but also for the examples he left us. When this intention became
  known to my compatriots, it profoundly touched them, and they
  begged permission to take part in these homages, thus evidencing
  once more, the unity of feeling between the two Republics east
  and west of the great Ocean. Hence the coming to these shores of
  the Delegation headed by Mr. Hanotaux which you are welcoming
  to-night, a representative one, where the French Academy, the
  French Parliament, the French Army, French art, science, industry,
  commerce, press and, let us not forget that Franco-American art,
  aviation, have their spokesmen.

  The news of your intentions moved the more deeply the hearts of my
  compatriots that, after a long interruption, the task of Champlain,
  that task so well described by our Chairman of to-night, President
  Finley, in his Sorbonne lectures, has been resumed in the same
  spirit by our Republic of to-day.

  “The French,” wrote in the sixteenth century the great Italian poet
  Tasso, “are by nature unable to stand still and do nothing. When
  they cease to be in action, they wither like the mechanism of a
  clock that gets rusty if not in use.” We have been in no danger in
  these latter years, of rusting. If, on several continents, success
  has attended our efforts, it is because we took our inspiration
  from the precepts and examples left by the far-off ancestors,
  Champlain and his peers. Justice, friendliness, a desire to
  help and improve, must ever be among the chief articles of the
  colonist’s creed. The one sense to which throughout the world, even
  the lowest type of humanity responds, is the sense of Justice.

  Such was the opinion of your leaders too, of Washington above all
  others, who wrote to Lafayette: “The basis of our proceedings with
  the Indian nations has been and shall be Justice.” And, at this
  day, in the distant Philippine Islands, where schools have so
  much multiplied and President Taft has left, as a Governor, such
  noteworthy examples, this rule is known to be your rule.

  As for our own men they felt in the same way, that the contact
  with the white man ought to be a blessing, not a bane, to the less
  advanced races. Champlain, Joliet, La Salle were of one mind and
  opposed to the best of their ability the sale of “fire-water” to
  the natives; and a similar principle continues in force to-day in
  your Indian reservations. As to the development of the country by
  slave labor or by that of hired servants, Charlevoix wrote those
  memorable words: “I should prefer the last. When the time of their
  service is expired, they become inhabitants and increase the number
  of the King’s natural subjects, whereas the first are always
  strangers: and who can be assured that, by continually increasing
  in our colonies, they will not one day become formidable enemies?
  Can we depend upon slaves who are only attached to us by fear and
  for whom the very land where they are born has not the dear name of
  Mother-country?”

  In this, as is so often the case, interest and virtue combine: both
  give the colonist the same advice; which, as mankind progresses, it
  will be more and more dangerous to discard. The measure of success
  we have reached is, I hope, founded on no less stable a basis. What
  this success has been and whether we are or not worthy compatriots
  of Champlain, let those determine who have recently visited our
  colonial empire; and I for one would gladly abide by the judgment
  of such American travelers as Edgar Allen Forbes, in his _Land of
  the White Helmet_.

  By this delegation an image is brought to you, the image of France.
  More than once before, under one form or another, when the struggle
  was for independence or for greatness, it appeared on these shores,
  and was a good omen. The exchange of tokens of friendship between
  two nations with so much in common in the past, so much in the
  future, with their similar aims, has been ceaseless. Be assured
  that our hearts beat in unison with yours, and will ever remember
  with gratitude what is now being done to honor a son of France
  by the states of New York and Vermont, and by that generous,
  hospitable, tireless committee, the Champlain Committee.

  The ancients used to place amulets as harbingers of good luck in
  the foundations of their great buildings. The figure of France to
  be placed on the base of the Champlain monument is being offered
  to you, not merely as a thing of beauty, but also as an amulet
  to bring luck to a nation whom we have never ceased to love.
  (Applause.)

In presenting the next speaker, President Finley said:

A few weeks ago I was in great peril of losing my life by falling off
the western boundary of the State of New York into the Niagara river.
I was trying to follow the path of the Frenchmen who carried from
Lake Ontario to a point several miles above the Falls, the equipment
for the first sailing vessel to navigate the waters of the Upper
Lakes. While I was climbing to a narrow ledge of rock covered with
ice, a hundred feet above the river, I appreciated as never before
the hardihood of the French explorers and the dearness of the soil
of New York to me. I have a particular satisfaction in being able to
stand here to-night and to introduce to you the Acting Governor of
this Empire State, Governor Conway.


ADDRESS OF LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR THOMAS F. CONWAY

  The discovery of Lake Champlain, the tercentenary of which we
  celebrate, was an event of transcendent importance. Viewed from the
  standpoint of scenic grandeur, this magnificent body of water with
  its setting of mountains, valleys and islands, presents a picture
  of unrivaled beauty and sublimity unsurpassed upon the face of
  the earth. Viewed from the standpoint of history, the Champlain
  Valley was, from the time of its discovery until the close of the
  Revolution, the scene of events of world-wide interest; events that
  have had an important bearing upon the history of modern times.
  It was upon its shores the first battle between Champlain and the
  Iroquois was fought and, according to the most authentic evidence,
  at this identical spot that the plaque “La France” is to be placed.
  It was also upon its shores, near Ticonderoga, that the intrepid
  Montcalm defeated Lord Abercromby and, for the time, stayed the
  aggression of the English in their efforts to control the destinies
  of the Western world. It was upon its waters the first naval battle
  of the Revolution was fought, at Valcour, between Benedict Arnold,
  commanding the American fleet, and Sir Guy Carleton, commanding the
  British squadron. It was also upon its waters, in Plattsburgh Bay,
  that the last naval battle of the war of 1812 took place between
  the American fleet commanded by the brave Commodore Macdonough,
  and the British by the equally intrepid commander, Downie—a battle
  which is now considered one of the decisive battles of the world.

  Its discovery, therefore, and the events surrounding and following
  it richly merited its tercentenary celebration and this, its
  culminating and crowning feature. Indeed, this celebration in
  itself is an event of striking significance. It stamps indelibly
  upon the life and work of Samuel Champlain the world’s verdict. It
  attests its judgment of their nobility and value and vindicates
  the judgment of his contemporaries in conferring high honor and
  commendation upon him.

  It demonstrates in a most impressive manner the fact that nobility
  of character and unselfish devotion to ideals and purposes which
  lead upward and onward in human progress, constitute the true path
  to immortality of fame. Actuated by a desire to bring to the New
  World a knowledge of the faith, the philosophy and the civilization
  of his native land, more than by motives of conquest, or to
  extend its territorial dominion, he exemplified in his conduct
  the distinguishing traits of the colonial policy of his nation,
  which then and ever since has been characterized by a desire to
  confer benefits upon new subjects while acquiring dominion without
  bloodshed or destruction; its recognition of the right of every
  people to give expression to their ideals, their genius and their
  national aspirations in laws and institutions established by
  themselves.

  The influence of his example and the effect of his work have been
  profound and abiding.

  The first white man to set foot within the borders of what has
  become the Empire State of the Union, he doubtless was fired with
  the ambition to make it a part of New France. He found it peopled
  by the most powerful native tribes inhabiting the New World.

  The Five Nations, represented in the Long House of the Iroquois,
  dominated the region, and were, and had been for more than a
  century thoroughly organized for defense and aggression. Its
  confederation evinced political genius of a high order. In their
  warfare with the Algonquians of the St. Lawrence Valley, and other
  native tribes, they had made the beautiful Champlain an almost
  constant scene of conflict and carnage; so much so that its fertile
  valleys and beautiful shores ceased to be inhabited, except as
  the various warrior bands camped upon them temporarily in their
  expeditions of plunder and destruction.

  Later, in the prolonged struggles of the two greatest nations of
  the time, France and England, to establish their authority and
  enforce their respective civilizations upon the New World, the
  alliance of the Long House of the Iroquois with the English forces
  determined the conflict in their favor and thus ended the effort
  inaugurated by Champlain to establish the dominion of France over a
  large territory of which he was the discoverer.

  While, as a result, the civic policy of the country was thereafter
  dominated by British power and influence down to the time of the
  Revolution, nevertheless, the memory of the valor and the heroism
  of explorers like Champlain and of missionaries like Marquette, La
  Salle, and their co-workers, left their enduring impress for good,
  not only upon the civilization of our State, but upon that of our
  whole country.

  For all this we owe a debt of gratitude to France, hardly less than
  the debt we owe it for its unselfish and priceless assistance in
  our struggle for independence.

  In the three hundred years since the discovery of the lake and
  region identified with the name of Champlain, the world has
  witnessed a greater advance in intelligence, in human progress, in
  the principle of liberty and in the recognition and protection by
  governments of the rights of the ordinary man, than in any similar
  period in recorded history.

  To the intelligent observer it is evident that this advance
  is to-day progressing with undiminished force on the basis of
  individual freedom, individual responsibility and self-imposed
  restraint, which constitute the inspiration, the steadying force
  and the vitalizing principle of true progress.

  Proof of all this confronts us in every land to-day; but, as
  convincing and pertinent evidence on this occasion, reference need
  only be made to progress in the region with which the name and fame
  of Samuel Champlain are imperishably associated.

  I am glad that our distinguished guests from France are to visit
  that region and especially the beautiful lake bearing his name,
  and contrast existing conditions with the earlier scenes of
  savage warfare and bloodshed there enacted by the natives prior
  to Champlain’s advent, and subsequently, during the struggle for
  supremacy between the two great contending nations of that day.

  We would have you see the peaceful and tranquil aspect of that
  beautiful lake now with its bosom dotted with splendid steamers,
  the instrumentalities of pleasure and commerce; the well equipped
  railroads skirting its shores, required and maintained by the
  enterprise and business activities there existing; the prosperous
  cities, the thriving villages, the well-kept and productive
  farms; the contented and happy homes; the schools, the churches,
  the hospitals, the charitable organizations; in short, every
  institution in which a most advanced civilization finds its
  best expression and through which it performs its best and most
  elevating service for mankind.

  It will enable you to better understand and appreciate the depth of
  our gratitude to your great countryman and the meaning we attach to
  this celebration commemorating his achievements.

  On behalf of the state of New York and its upwards of nine millions
  of inhabitants, for whom I have the privilege and honor to speak on
  this occasion, I extend to our distinguished guests from France a
  most cordial and heartfelt welcome.

  And, if I may be permitted to anticipate a little, I will convey
  to them in advance and, through them, to their country, the
  appreciation and gratitude of our state and its people for the gift
  they bring and the honor they do us. It is the conception of a
  great artist, admirably typifying the ideals and aspirations of a
  great nation. I beg to assure you, our honored guests, that we will
  ever treasure it as an expression of the good will and friendship
  of our sister republic—France—placing the seal of its approval
  and appreciation on this celebration honoring the achievements of
  Samuel Champlain.

  In closing, permit me to say that the recollection of your visit to
  our state and the motives that inspired it will ever be associated
  with the gift of your country, lending to it an element of personal
  interest as pleasing as it will be permanent in the minds and
  hearts of all who may have the privilege of meeting you during your
  visit. (Applause.)

[Illustration: GOVERNOR JOHN A. MEAD

Chairman of the Vermont Commission

By courtesy of Shover, Montpelier, Vt.]

In alluding to the Governor of Vermont, President Finley remarked:

The Governor of Vermont, with rare forbearance, wishes to be excused
from speaking. But as Jacques Cartier, nearly a century before the
Pilgrims landed at Plymouth, saw, first of Europeans, the peaks of
the Green mountains, so I wish you, from the land of the pilot of St.
Malo, to see the topmost peak in Vermont to-day, its Governor, the
Hon. John A. Mead.

Governor Mead stood and bowed to the audience. (Applause.)

The Toastmaster then introduced Mayor William J. Gaynor of New York
City.

When in the most beautiful and largest city in the southwest of
France a year ago (Bordeaux), I learned, to my surprise, that the
great philosopher and essayist, Montaigne, had been its mayor. And it
is possible that generations hence the distinction of Mr. Gaynor as
Mayor may be surpassed even by his fame as a philosopher. Certainly
no man in public life to-day is writing in his everyday letters with
such pungency and appeal on some of the problems of life, which
continue to disturb mankind.


ADDRESS OF MAYOR WILLIAM J. GAYNOR

  I am sure, said the Mayor, I am quite willing to say nothing and to
  write another letter. (Laughter and applause.) This is the third
  time I have greeted the delegation from France. Once was at the
  City Hall and the other time was at a luncheon at the Metropolitan
  Club. And I am very anxious to hear M. Hanotaux. The coming of
  these gentlemen will cause us to think a great deal about what we
  owe to France and to the French people.

  You women, the Mayor added, with his eyes twinkling, might well
  consider the economy of the woman of France. She knows her market
  prices and she goes to market. (Laughter and applause.) I think if
  some of you will follow her example the cost of living will begin
  to come down right away. (Laughter.)

  There never was a time, I believe, when in the hearts of the
  American people there was any danger of forgetting what we owe to
  France. (Applause.)

President Finley then presented the French delegation as follows:

And now, ladies and gentlemen, how shall I characterize to you the
men who constitute this notable delegation? I wish I were able to
do so in my own tongue as did Baron d’Estournelles de Constant so
eloquently a few days ago in an acquired tongue,—to tell you how this
great historian and statesman, Hanotaux, has, with an art which only
a Greek or a Frenchman could command, gathered into this company men
representing every high interest of France to carry this symbol of
international good will to our Republic and affix it to our monument,
in eternal memory of their countryman.

Two members of the French Academy, M. René Bazin and M. Lamy;
a foremost representative of the art of France, M. Cormon; two
members of Parliament, one already our well-beloved friend, Sénateur
Baron d’Estournelles de Constant, and M. Louis Barthou; the great
geographer, Vidal de la Blache; General Lebon; the riders of the sea
and the riders of the air; and then, the representatives of two great
families who have been especially distinguished in America’s service.
What art of selection! I must, however, be content simply to name to
you the speakers already so well introduced to you. I present first,
M. Gabriel Hanotaux.

M. Hanotaux responded in French, but he supplied the following
English version of his address.


ADDRESS OF HIS EXCELLENCY, ALBERT AUGUSTE GABRIELLE HANOTAUX

  GENTLEMEN.—The French Delegation you have so cordially
  welcomed is fully aware that this is the most important stage
  of its journey. For, albeit we are going to Lake Champlain to
  personally place in the hands of the architects of the monument,
  the bust of “La France” which is to be fixed there as a seal of
  friendship and gratitude, it is here that we make the formal
  presentation to the Commissions and, through them, to the world of
  friends which France has in the United States.

  Here in New York, in this Empire City, where so much of past effort
  and present energy are concentrated, where five millions of human
  hearts beat in unison for the greater glory and ultimate triumph of
  humanity, we have met with a touching, affectionate and splendid
  reception which speaks to us of the warm-heartedness of the Great
  American Republic.

  From the moment we placed foot upon this soil we have been
  captivated and carried away by such a whirlwind of cordiality and
  good-fellowship that we scarce have had time to recover ourselves.
  First of all the American branches of the Comité France-Amérique
  were there to receive us, and, at once, we recognized within
  their ranks the eminent men who by reason of their origin, their
  connections or their particularly elegant culture have linked
  themselves of their own accord with our beloved France. Nothing
  could have touched us more than this first reception. France,
  France itself before us, beyond the mighty ocean we had just
  crossed under such thrilling conditions on the morrow of an awful
  disaster. On the other hand, and you, gentlemen, will not, I trust,
  forget it, the first vessel which came to you, after so dire a
  catastrophe, bearing words of comfort and hope was named “France.”

  Our welcome, already so touching, grew apace. Our eminent
  ambassador to the United States, Monsieur Jusserand, who has
  given so much of his time and taken so much trouble, to organize
  this mission, which he himself conceived, informed Mr. Taft, the
  President of the United States, of our desire to present to him the
  respectful homage of the delegation.

  The President, despite his overwhelming occupations, received
  us at his table; in the very kindest manner he honored, in our
  persons, the thought which has brought us here. He was so kind as
  to give us personally, in connection with our visit, assurances
  of his encouragement and approval; which have been for us an
  ample reward. These countless acts of friendship of all kinds we
  have looked upon—and rightly so—as being addressed to our beloved
  Mother-Country and to the Government of the French Republic, which
  has so splendidly encouraged and aided us in the accomplishment of
  our mission.

  Travelling through a part of the American continent on our way to
  Washington, we were able to admire the ever-increasing progress
  and masterful civilization of your Republic. We left the city
  of five million souls, so concentrated in its immensity that
  in a manner it rises skyward upon itself; we passed through an
  admirable country, looking, at this season of the year, like some
  great garden dotted with cottages and shrubs and trees; we crossed
  majestic rivers which evoked the finest pages of Chateaubriand,
  the protagonist of the French writers of America; the steel cars
  carried us with prodigious speed through long tunnels and over
  iron bridges which groaned beneath the onrushing train; we barely
  caught sight of Philadelphia, the City of Brotherly Love, for a
  space at once the citadel and the keystone of American liberty; and
  we were in another city, a city beautiful, a city verdant, whose
  noble proportions are worthy of the great nation of which it is the
  capital, a city planned, we are proud to recall, by an officer of
  the French army: Major L’Enfant. We were taken to Mount Vernon and
  there we were thrilled by a greater sight than any we had yet seen:
  the shrine where you cherish in the most impressive simplicity the
  memory of the Man whose life was naught else than the constant
  blending of greatness and simplicity.

  And, gentlemen, when on our return here we think of all this
  greatness, of the endless and unceasing activity, of these wonders
  heaped upon wonders, when we think of the hundred million human
  beings living in the United States, earning their substance here,
  finding here their work, their pleasures, their luxuries and their
  ideal; loving this land they themselves have created, which belongs
  to them and to which they belong, proud of an admirable past,
  confident in a future which gives promise of even greater things,
  how could our imagination fail to go back to the men who were the
  first pioneers in this country, to the men who dared its perils
  and wrested from it its secrets when there were no other European
  inhabitants.

  The accounts of their travels depict them to us, with all their
  daring, with all their perseverance, their hardships and sufferings
  and sacrifices; but finally with their slow and hard-won victories
  over Nature and Fate.

  We know that the first among them, fired by the discovery of mines
  in South America, especially in Peru, sought only gold. Gold there
  was in very truth, but not where they were looking for it. What
  a prodigious misunderstanding the mirage of gold caused between
  this land of plenty and the men who landed here; it cannot be
  exaggerated, and how little it would have been to the honor of
  the human race if, at the same time, there had not been another
  and entirely different mirage born of human determination and
  intelligence and worthy of the highest aspirations of Man. It is
  an historical fact that while the conquistadores were seeking gold
  and only gold, other explorers, the advance guard of science,
  the conquistadores of the ideal, were sacrificing themselves to
  a worthier aim: the finding of the northwest passage which around
  North America was to lead them to China and India. The ones were
  only discovering new lands that they might mine and impoverish
  them, the others that they might better know and develop them!

  Both mirages, and illusions on both sides; but in the end practical
  results; so true is it that the dream of the impossible is at times
  the most active instrument of immediate and useful achievement.

  The practical results we have before our eyes; and they came about
  through the efforts of a third set of explorers whom I will now
  attempt to recall because one of the most characteristic among them
  was our illustrious fellow-Frenchman whose memory we are gathered
  here to honor, Samuel Champlain.

  Landing on this new continent, these men were immediately struck
  by one thing: to how great a degree it resembled the European
  countries which had given them birth. I want to lay stress
  upon this point for, to their observant eyes, it was at once a
  revelation and a surprise. They had to make an effort—can you
  believe it—to convince themselves that they were not falling upon
  an imaginary and legendary land, a land of fabulous dreams, a land
  of the Arabian Nights. Everything here was like their homes and, it
  is literally true, they could not believe their own eyes.

  For you must not forget that the first accounts published about
  the new world had described it as prodigious, fantastic and out
  of proportion to anything ever before known. These legends were
  believed by the credulity of the Middle-Ages, from which we were
  only just emerging, they were strengthened by the tales so blithely
  told by travellers for, as the old saying has it, “falsehood is
  easy to one who comes from afar.” But above all, these legends had
  been sunk into the minds of men by the startling facts of the early
  discoveries. In the heavens

      ... _des étoiles nouvelles_

  a wonderful light, the torrid climes of Central America, Nature so
  powerful as to be actually deadly, the impenetrable forests, the
  strange vegetation, the prodigious width of the rivers rolling to
  the sea, everything combined, but above all Gold, Gold everywhere,
  Gold in the daily life of all, Gold in the temples, Gold on the
  ground, Gold in the bowels of the earth, Gold seen and Gold unseen,
  that is what exalted their overwrought imaginations to madness. It
  was impossible to admit that this land could be a land like other
  lands. So that it needed extraordinary common sense (if these
  two words may be used together), it needed an almost miraculous
  self-control in these pioneers, in this third set of explorers of
  which I am speaking, to forsake their preconceived notions and get
  down to earth again and see that this land was after all a land
  just like other lands, like the lands from which they had sprung,
  loamy and fertile and fruitful, where the trees were like European
  trees, with clusters of vines hanging from the branches; where
  wheat grew naturally; where the fish of the rivers and sea were the
  same fish that they had at home, a land where the cattle of the
  Mother-country waxed fat, and where at the accustomed seasons the
  welcome sward stretched its mantle of green bedecked with flowers
  to the very threshold of the abodes of man; where in the fall the
  countryside was crowned with Gold; where the rule of life was the
  normal and accustomed rule. Gold was lacking, at least the Gold so
  greedily sought, but on the other hand in the soil and on the soil
  Gold there was in very truth and in untold abundance, the Gold of
  natural wealth—a civilizing, not a destructive Gold. I mean the
  Gold of labor, the Gold of human brawn, the Gold of intellect, the
  Gold of inspiration, the Gold which is forever being created by the
  mind and will of Man; but which was only to open up its ideal mine
  of surpassing wealth after centuries of sacrifice, of labor, of
  tenacity, and in exchange for an immense toll of energy.

  These new conquistadores, the conquistadores of labor, who set
  their sails not for the land of dreams, but for the land of
  the Things-As-They-Are, were the real founders of the mighty
  civilization which surrounds us, and once again, in the very
  forefront of their ranks, stands our great fellow-countryman Samuel
  Champlain.

  It was not that these men were lacking in imagination, for
  imagination is the creative faculty in Man, and especially so
  in the statesman. To do things is to see ahead. He had indeed a
  wonderful imagination, a genius for foresight which was uncanny,
  this extraordinary man who foretold the future of America, who
  pointed out the location of the Panama Canal, who sketched the
  development of the great Republic of the United States, who fixed
  the sites of Boston, Montreal, Quebec and so many other great
  and prosperous cities. His imagination was active, yes, but his
  activities were always devoted to useful achievement and love of
  justice.

  He was the first to see that any colony on the American continent
  would have to be self-supporting, those are his own words. He
  builded, he planted, he sowed crops, he raised stockades and laid
  out roads, as a man relying solely upon himself. Having shattered
  the flimsy phantasy of fabulous Gold he quite simply became a
  farmer, a soldier, an engineer; and, when upon this land he laid
  the corner-stone of the first building, he laid at the same time
  the foundation of a new civilization and created an empire. Once
  again the nobility of labor had saved the world from the idle
  vanity of dreams.

  Labor!—There is the true basis of American civilization, as founded
  by those pioneers who understood, such was their common sense, the
  great things that could be done in the land where they had come to
  stay.—Labor, the Father of Liberty, the Father of Independence,
  the Father of Equality and of Justice; in a word the only solid
  basis of Society.

  This, then, is the characteristic—henceforth unchangeable—of your
  American civilization. Everybody works, and there is work for every
  one and for all, but there is no room for the idle. The ceaseless
  activity of your lives shows it. The physical and mental strain
  to which the richest as well as the poorest of your citizens
  voluntarily subject themselves proves it. A glance at your way of
  living shows that you have remained faithful to the principle of
  your founders. The intense activity we have witnessed during our
  short trip through your country, and which we find at its highest
  pitch in this Empire City of New York, what is it but a complete
  devotion to the duty imposed upon man by the opening words of the
  Book of Books: “Thou shalt earn thy bread by the sweat of thy
  brow.” Hence your incomparable greatness.

  Blessed be Labor, gentlemen. Go on setting the example of labor to
  the world. It is not Gold that counts; it is the constant and never
  ceasing employment of all the faculties of Man. You have already
  accomplished a prodigious work,—your future achievements will be
  even more extraordinary. No one can say what the future of this
  continent will be when the Isthmus of Panama is cut in twain, when
  the waters of the two oceans shall be joined and the coasts of the
  two Americas brought together as the leaves of a closing book. It
  is a new source of wealth, it is a new field of activity and a
  still wider field of authority and responsibility. Between Asia
  and Europe your Republic certainly stands as the dividing line of
  the world. You are at the fulcrum of the scale. The balance of the
  world’s power will in future rest with you.

  But now, at this very time, other problems confront you, and, first
  of all, let us face it frankly, the problem of the government of
  the great democracies by themselves.

  All this stirs you, occupies your thoughts, and arouses your
  passions. All this moves, deeply, those who come to visit you. To
  use the words of the poet of old. They see clearly that in you
  is being born something greater than an Iliad: “_Aliquod majus
  nascitur Iliade._”

  In these troublous times, gentlemen, remain true to the law of
  labor, to the law of those who first planned and laid out your
  future life. Look back upon those pioneers who, face to face with
  the early difficulties, foreseeing the growth that was to come and
  how complex it was to be, bequeathed to you, in order that you
  might carry out the work, a single and a simple law: the law of
  labor.

  Your commemoration of Champlain, to take our modest part in which
  we have crossed the ocean, proves how faithful and devoted you are
  to the memory of the founders.

  Courage, Labor, Justice, Faith in the Ideal, such the reasons for
  these useful lives. We are proud that among them one of the most
  glorious was that of our fellow-countryman—Champlain. We thank you
  for cherishing his memory.

  And it is to show that France herself joins in these sentiments
  that we are come here, in such numbers, to bring you for the
  Champlain monument, erected by the States of New York and Vermont,
  a bust born of the genius of our illustrious fellow-countryman
  Rodin, an image of that which we hold most dear: France.

  In the mighty structure of American civilization there is something
  of France—allow us to believe gentlemen that you will not forget
  it—and on the monument you are erecting this image will remain
  forever sealed to recall and symbolize that fact. This image we
  give to you as Champlain, our fellow-countryman, gave the best of
  his life to this land of yours. We give it to the United States,
  we give it to the States of New York and Vermont, the builders
  of the lighthouse rising upon the shores of the lake which bears
  Champlain’s name; we give it to these Commissions which have so
  graciously invited us here; we give it to all the friends of France
  in America.

  I raise my glass, gentlemen, to the Lake Champlain Association and
  the Tercentenary Commissions, and I drink to the imperishable and
  brotherly union of our two countries: France and America. (Long
  applause.)

President Finley then presented M. Louis Barthou, who was not on the
programme, but who made a most favorable impression on all who had
the good fortune to meet him and listen to his charming eloquence.
His glowing and felicitous tribute was listened to with rapt
attention. Unfortunately his address was not reported and no copy has
been obtainable, much to the regret of all who have known him and his
prominent position in the affairs of the French Republic. At one time
he was the Minister of Justice in the Cabinet and is a noted lawyer
as well as one of the leading parliamentarians of the Chamber of
Deputies.

President Finley then introduced Baron d’Estournelles de Constant,
who spoke in English in his usual felicitous manner in appreciation
of the reception tendered to the delegation from France and the
hospitality accorded to them in the various American cities which
they had visited. The Baron is well known in America, where he has
advocated International Peace, and spoke in terms of affection
of his friends in America and what they were doing to promote
International Peace. It is a matter of regret that his speech was not
reported in full so that it could be included in this Final Report.

President Finley then introduced Senator Henry W. Hill, the Secretary
of the New York Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission, who on behalf
of the two Commissions received the gift of the people of France
and expressed the cordial feelings of appreciation with which the
beautiful and appropriate bust is received in the following address:


ADDRESS OF SENATOR HENRY W. HILL

  _Ambassador Jusserand, Your Excellency Albert Auguste Gabriel
  Hanotaux, and other Members of the Delegation from France, and
  Gentlemen of the New York and Vermont Tercentenary Commissions, and
  of the New York Champlain Association_: This is a fitting postlude
  to the Bi-State programme of International Tercentenary exercises
  in commemoration of the discovery of one of the most charming
  lakes in America by the brave and high-minded Samuel Champlain,
  who believed that “the salvation of one soul is of more value than
  the conquest of an enemy.” The light of civilization impersonated
  in his entrance into the Champlain valley and thus first gleaming
  through the darkness of savagery is to be symbolized in a memorial
  lighthouse erected by the states of New York and Vermont on
  property of the United States Government at Crown Point Forts,
  that location being for 150 years one of the strategic points
  of the French possessions in America, and the life work of the
  discoverer is to be further perpetuated by an heroic size statue
  by the New York sculptor, Carl Augustus Heber, at Plattsburgh.
  The people of the two States in grateful appreciation of the
  life, services and high moral character of the discoverer of the
  lake which bears his name, and who was the first white man to set
  foot on the soil of New York and Vermont, eleven years before
  the Pilgrims entered Plymouth Bay, and two months before Henry
  Hudson discovered the river bearing his name, flowing into this
  beautiful harbor of New York, conceived and carried forward the
  Champlain Tercentenary Celebration of 1909, which has awakened deep
  interest in the principles and common purposes of two Republics,
  and done much to strengthen the friendship between them, that
  prompted France to shed across the seas its kindly and beneficent
  influence upon this Republic in its infancy. In the conduct of
  that Tercentenary now considered as one of the most noted American
  commemorative celebrations, the Republic of France represented by
  its gifted and eloquent patriot and scholar, Ambassador Jusserand,
  the Kingdom of Great Britain by its distinguished Ambassador
  Right Honorable James Bryce, the Dominion of Canada by its noted
  Postmaster-General Lemieux, the Province of Quebec by its gifted
  Premier Sir Lomer Gouin, the Empire of Japan by its Vice-Admiral,
  Uriu, and the United States by its President and Secretary of
  War, and some members of its Senate and House of Representatives,
  and representatives of the Army and Navy, participated with the
  States of New York and Vermont, and thus gave it an international
  character, worthy the important events which it was designed to
  commemorate.

  You would be likely to form a more adequate conception of the
  magnitude of the Tercentenary Celebration, if you were to picture
  the Champlain valley, one hundred miles in length, and twenty-five
  miles in width, with the lake, as stated by Dr. Cady, “a prismed
  pendant dropped from out the skies,” interspersed with beautiful
  islands, and buttressed by prominent headlands, as an arena with
  overtowering mountains on either side, forming a background of
  superb natural beauty and suggesting ideals of the true and
  sublime in nature and a sky of Italian beauty vaulting a lake
  of crystal waters, where five great scenes were presented to
  thronging thousands of interested spectators—one at Crown Point
  which projects into the lake so far as nearly to sever it into two
  sections, where was erected at vast expenditure of money, in 1731,
  by the French, Fort Frédéric, in honor of the French Secretary
  of Foreign Affairs, Frédéric Maurepas, under the supervision
  of the Marquis de Beauharnois, Governor-General of Canada, and
  later were also erected the English forts by the forces under
  General Amherst, the forts now forming a grand ruin; another
  scene twenty miles distant, on the following day, at Ticonderoga,
  “the Gateway of the Nation,” where was built Fort Carillon, in
  1755-6, around which struggled the flower of contending armies
  of three sovereign nations for its control; another scene, sixty
  miles distant, at Plattsburgh Barracks, on a plateau overlooking
  Valcour Island, where occurred one of the chief naval engagements
  of the Revolution, the report of which electrified the Continental
  Congress, and also overlooking Plattsburgh Bay, where occurred the
  decisive naval engagement of the War of 1812, in which the American
  fleet under Macdonough defeated and routed the British fleet under
  Downie; and still another scene twenty-five miles distant, on the
  following day, in the city of Burlington, under the shadow of
  the university which had been burned during the War of 1812, and
  whose corner-stone was relaid by Marquis de Lafayette in 1825, and
  where stands a statue erected to his memory, on a sloping hillside
  overlooking Burlington Bay, that beautiful Baiae of our inland sea,
  and the clear waters of the historic lake walled in on the west by
  the rugged and occasionally snow-capped peaks of the Adirondacks;
  and the fifth scene, forty-five miles distant, on the following
  day, at beautiful Isle La Motte, which was the first land in the
  Champlain valley visited by Samuel Champlain, which had been for
  two centuries or more the common meeting place of warring Indian
  tribes, and which became the rendezvous of missionaries, and where
  in 1666, was built Fort Ste. Anne, and where High Mass was first
  celebrated in the State of Vermont, and where was stationed the
  Carignan-Salières Regiment of 600 French veterans. At each of
  these scenes were Indian pageants, moved from place to place on a
  floating island, participated in by 150 descendants of the native
  aboriginal tribes that occupied the Champlain valley, and enlivened
  by military and naval forces, with formal addresses, speeches and
  poems, by the President of the United States and the distinguished
  diplomats, orators and poets in attendance, presenting anew the
  story and thrilling events that have transpired in the Champlain
  valley since its discovery three centuries ago. This will afford
  some conception of the great drama of the Champlain Tercentenary
  Celebration, in which Samuel Champlain, the navigator, colonizer
  and apostle of civilization in that valley, _Chevalier sans peur et
  sans reproche_, was the hero and central figure.

  On this occasion we are profoundly touched at the generosity and
  friendship of President Fallières and the French people, exhibited
  in the presentation by the distinguished delegation who have come
  from France, of this allegorical bust “La France,” by Auguste
  Rodin, and we gratefully accept the same in the name of the New
  York and Vermont Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commissions, in behalf
  of the people of the two states, as well as of the people of the
  United States, and through you, Monsieur Hanotaux, and other
  members of your delegation from France, we tender to President
  Fallières and the people of France, who have so generously
  contributed to the purchase and presentation of this beautiful
  bust, our grateful appreciation and acknowledgments.

  This work of art, coming as a voluntary expression of the good
  will and cordial feelings of the French people for Americans who
  have shown some appreciation of the discoveries and services for
  humanity of one of the most noted French explorers among many, who
  were first to open up the interior of this continent to the onward
  march of civilization, is an imperishable testimonial of that
  abiding friendship existing between the peoples of the two foremost
  Republics in the world, which have done so much for the liberty,
  equality and fraternity of mankind. When we reflect upon the
  evolution of French institutions from Charlemagne to Fallières, the
  progress of the French people in the arts and sciences within the
  last century, and the contributions that they have made to these,
  and to literature and to art, as well as to the world’s diplomacy
  and intellectual development, we do not wonder that the Republic
  across the sea, which you represent, gentlemen, is aglow with
  vitality and energized by new and expanding ideas, and is forging
  forward as one of the most progressive and powerful nations in the
  world. Had not the French people been open to new ideas, possibly
  they would not have responded to the appeals of Franklin and our
  other patriots during the Revolution, and the Marquis de Lafayette,
  Count de Rochambeau, with his 6,000 soldiers, Count de Grasse, with
  his fleet, and others, would not have crossed the Atlantic to aid
  the Colonies in their struggle for independence.

  Lafayette and others carried back with them something of the
  inspiration which they had derived from their experience in this
  country and from their contact with General Washington and other
  patriots, and their reports did something to arouse the National
  Assembly of France, and the princes and potentates of European
  nations to a realization of the evidences of the Republican
  movement in America as well as in Europe, which culminated in
  making most of the nations of western Europe more democratic
  and responsive to popular liberties. On the establishment of a
  Republican form of government in France in 1848, the President
  of the United States transmitted a message to Congress, in
  which he said: “We can never forget that France was our early
  friend in our eventful Revolution, and generously aided us in
  shaking off a foreign yoke and becoming a free and independent
  people. We have enjoyed the blessing of our system of well
  regulated self-government for nearly three-fourths of a century,
  and can properly appreciate its value. Our ardent and sincere
  congratulations are extended to the patriotic people of France upon
  their noble and thus far successful efforts to found for their
  future government liberal institutions similar to our own. It is
  not doubtful that under the benign influence of free institutions
  the enlightened statesmen of Republican France will find it to
  be for her true interests and permanent glory to cultivate with
  the United States the most liberal principles of international
  intercourse and commercial reciprocity, whereby the happiness and
  prosperity of both nations will be promoted.” A fitting response
  to this was made by the National Assembly of France, and there
  have from that time forth existed cordial relations between the
  two sister Republics. These relations were emphasized in the
  presentation by the French people of the colossal statue “Liberty
  Enlightening the World,” by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, unveiled
  with elaborate ceremonies on Bedloe’s Island in New York harbor,
  on October 28, 1886. When the Rodin allegorical bust “La France”
  is in its permanent home by the Champlain Memorial Light at the
  Crown Point Forts near the head of Lake Champlain, it will be on
  the highway of travel by water between New York harbor and Lake
  Champlain, through the enlarged and improved Champlain Canal
  nearing completion, and so be brought into communication with the
  statue of Liberty, and will do something to restore the interest
  of travelers as well as of our French-American citizens, in the
  history of that region, for 150 years under control of the French
  nation, and within a few miles of which at Ticonderoga, Montcalm
  and others achieved imperishable fame, and will be a further
  lasting expression of the artistic temperament and proverbial
  generosity of the French people toward the people of this nation,
  the genius of whose institutions has been more or less reflected in
  the evolution of French institutions during the last century. As an
  expression of one of your most renowned sculptors, it will awaken a
  deeper interest of the people in that valley in art, which has been
  ideally expressed in this allegorical bust “La France,” in a way to
  symbolize the marvelous genius of the French people.

  The members of New York and Vermont Lake Champlain Tercentenary
  Commissions bid you, gentlemen of the French delegation, a most
  cordial welcome to our shores, and tender to you their deep
  appreciation of the gift which you bring from your people.
  (Applause.)




V. FRENCH DELEGATION ENTERTAINED BY THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE
STATE OF NEW YORK


On May 2d, The Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York
entertained at luncheon the French delegation in the Hall of the
Chamber on Liberty street, New York City. Ambassador Jusserand and
the visiting delegation and other invited guests were presented to
President A. Barton Hepburn by Hon. McDougall Hawkes and then seated
on the dais. The flags of the United States and France were entwined
behind the President’s chair.

In welcoming the distinguished visitors, President A. Barton Hepburn
said:

  When this country was struggling to win a place in the sisterhood
  of nations, without facilities for manufacturing the necessary
  means for defense, or money to purchase the same, at war with
  one of the most powerful nations of Europe, supplemented by the
  inspired hostility of the then powerful tribes of surrounding
  Indians, poor in purse, rich only in patriotic resolve to win
  their freedom, with credit shrouded by the gloom of possible, if
  not probable failure—at this critical juncture France came to our
  support, with soldiers and ships of war, and rendered the greatest
  aid in winning our independence.

  In addition, France loaned us money. The amount was not large,
  indeed it was small, compared with present day loans or
  transactions, but the loan was made at a time when our continental
  currency was so depreciated, that it has given to our language an
  expression of worthlessness,—“not worth a continental.”

  It was real, metallic money, and the ring of that money resounded
  throughout the colonies; it strengthened credit and renewed
  confidence. It was tangible evidence that a great nation believed
  in us—believed in our future.

  At the Battle of Yorktown, which was the crowning victory that
  assured our independence, France furnished thirty-six ships of
  the line—the colonies none; of the land forces engaged, France
  furnished 7,000 veterans—the colonies 5,500 regulars and 3,500
  militia. The French fleet, under De Grasse, had previously defeated
  the British fleet and driven them from the Chesapeake, thereby
  depriving Cornwallis of all hope of reinforcements from New York,
  and also cutting off all hope of escape.

  We won our independence, but in our self-gratulation, let us
  not forget the magnitude of the service, and the extent of our
  obligation to France. Hostility to England, as well as love for
  America, may have inspired her action, but even so, it does not
  lessen the service rendered to us.

  This powerful alliance kindled anew the fires of patriotism, and
  roused a countrywide feeling of gratitude and love for France,
  which has ever since continued. May this feeling grow in intensity
  with succeeding years!

  God grant that these two great commercial nations may find
  prosperity and happiness in the paths of peace, and side by side,
  shoulder to shoulder, may their joint influence make for peace and
  happiness throughout the world. (Applause.)

  I have read that the figure upon the coins of France—a woman
  sowing—symbolizes the idea that France sows while others reap.
  That is eminently true of the United States and eminently true of
  North America. When we recall that Canada, the Ohio territory and
  Louisiana once belonged to France, and recall how relatively small
  the Spanish province of Florida and the British colonies along the
  Atlantic Coast were, we realize what an empire on this continent,
  extending from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to the Gulf of Mexico, was
  once the territory of France.

  Her intrepid explorers, her patient priests and devoted
  missionaries sowed the seeds of civilization in this great
  territory, and the harvest of their labors we are reaping year by
  year.

  The magnificent statue of Liberty, that ornaments and
  dignifies our harbor—the creation of a great French artist and
  sculptor—Bartholdi—was a gift from France.

  Our guests visit this country at the present time to place a
  bas-relief, “La France”—the creation of another great French artist
  and sculptor—Rodin—upon a monument erected by the states of New
  York and Vermont, at Crown Point Forts, in memory of the great
  explorers in this western world, chief among whom ranks Champlain.

  Our country was born amid the martial airs and chivalric heroism of
  the arms of France, and consecrated with the blood of her soldiers
  and sailors, and ever since she has given continuing proof of her
  friendship, both actual and sentimental—witness the presence of
  this distinguished delegation.

  Surely our hearts ought to go out to France, as they do, in
  reciprocal good will, and our prayers be offered, as they are, for
  her peace, prosperity and happiness.

  It is a pleasure and privilege for the commercial representatives
  of this state to receive and welcome you gentlemen, and I appeal
  to your kindly imagination to conceive the cordial greetings which
  we all feel, but which my language fails to express. (Applause.)

President Hepburn then introduced the French Ambassador, J. J.
Jusserand, who spoke eloquently on the importance of the extension
of the commercial relations between France and the United States and
also in appreciation of the hospitality shown in this country to the
French delegation, comprising distinguished officials and civilians
from the Republic of France.

President Hepburn then presented His Excellency, Gabriel Hanotaux as
follows:

  “He has won fame as a statesman and as a scholar. For many years he
  was Minister of Foreign Affairs in the government of France, and in
  the world of letters has achieved that most enviable distinction—a
  member of the French Academy. I have the pleasure of presenting M.
  Gabriel Hanotaux.”

M. Hanotaux was greeted with loud applause and spoke in French.


ADDRESS OF M. ALBERT AUGUSTE GABRIEL HANOTAUX

  _Monsieur le Président_: Si je jette les yeux autour de moi, ma
  pensée et celle de la délégation tout entière se porte vers les
  énergies humaines que vous représentez autour de nous. C’est
  la puissance des États-Unis d’Amérique, c’est cette activité
  inlassable qui a couvert de ses oeuvres et de ses conquêtes un
  continent et la planète entière se détournant de ses travaux pour
  nous faire un splendide et chaleureux accueil. Cette réunion, ces
  fleurs, ces drapeaux, tout se réunit pour faire sentir à la France
  combien elle est chère à cette vaillante cité new yorkaise. Mais il
  y a quelque chose de plus chaud et de plus précieux dans l’accueil
  que vous nous faites, c’est le mouvement du coeur. Comment vous
  exprimer notre reconnaissance?

  D’ailleurs n’est-ce pas la générosité américaine qui a déterminé le
  voyage de la Délégation française?

  Il y a quelques mois notre éminent ambassadeur, Monsieur Jusserand,
  qui veille avec tant de compétence à tout ce qui peut rapprocher
  les deux pays, nous avait signalé la prochaine érection sur les
  bords du lac Champlain d’un monument en l’honneur de notre
  vaillant compatriote. Il pensait avec raison que la France ne
  pouvait rester indifférente à ce beau geste qui en continue tant
  d’autres analogues. Mais comment la France manifesterait-elle sa
  gratitude, comment participerait-elle à cette glorification d’un de
  ses enfants?

  Seul, un appel au public et un appel à l’art pouvaient avoir
  une portée suffisante pour répondre. Par les soins du comité
  France-Amérique que nous représentons ici, les deux manifestations
  simultanées se sont produites: le public français a compris et
  a rapidement souscrit les listes en tête desquelles il trouvait
  le nom vénéré de Monsieur Fallières, Président de la République
  Française. En même temps l’art avait fait son oeuvre, et le
  sculpteur Rodin avait conçu et exécuté l’image de la “France” que
  nous avions sollicitée de son génie.

  C’est cette image que nous avons apportée ici pour qu’elle soit
  scellée au pied du monument de Champlain, comme un cachet et un
  sceau authentiquant une fois de plus la fidélité de nos sentiments
  communs et nos souvenirs.

  Vous avez bien voulu arrêter au passage dans cette grande ville
  la délégation qui va porter le bronze au lieu où il est destiné!
  Vous savez qu’elle appartient aux diverses grandes institutions
  et corporations françaises, au Parlement, à l’Académie et à
  l’Institut, à l’Armée, à l’Université, au Conseil d’État, à
  l’Industrie, au Commerce, et qu’elle contient trois membres
  descendant des familles qui ont combattu ou servi à l’époque de
  la guerre de l’Indépendance, Choiseul, Rochambeau, Lafayette,
  dont nous avons ici le petit-fils, le Comte de Chambrun. Celui-ci
  a reçu, en outre, une délégation spéciale de M. le Président
  du Conseil, Monsieur Raymond Poincaré, et il le représente
  personnellement.

  Ainsi, par-dessus les Océans, une même pensée nous unit. Les
  États-Unis élèvent un monument à un Français. La France vous
  envoie, par nous, son tribut de gratitude: une fois de plus les
  deux grandes démocraties pensent et agissent à l’unisson.

  Je ne veux pas tenter ici un parallèle presque impossible entre les
  deux Républiques, l’une vaste, puissante, jeune, pleine d’élan et
  de grandeur, l’autre plus à l’étroit sur son territoire resserré
  dans la vieille Europe, mais elle aussi, active et toujours jeune,
  éprise d’action, amante de la beauté, apportant à la réalisation
  de son idéal la plus noble culture peut-être qu’il y ait au monde,
  puisqu’elle remonte à deux mille ans en arrière aux temps où
  César conquit la Gaule et où le Christ naquit. Ce qui caractérise
  toutefois les relations toujours cordiales et toujours fidèles de
  ces deux pays, c’est que, se développant parallèlement, ils ne se
  heurtent nulle part. Je crois exprimer un fait réel, à la fois
  très simple et très fort, en disant, qu’entre la France et les
  États-Unis d’Amérique, il y a plus d’aptitude à se connaître et
  à se comprendre qu’entre deux autres pays du monde, quels qu’ils
  soient.

  Et, si l’on me demande pourquoi, je répondrai en employant la
  formule d’une des proclamations de la Nouvelle-Angleterre, avant
  la guerre de l’Indépendance, parce que ce sont deux pays “où l’on
  ne connaît ni suzerains, ni seigneurs, ni princes, mais seulement
  le peuple.”

  Tout donc porte les deux Républiques à l’entente et à l’union: des
  souvenirs communs, un objectif pareil, une conception semblable
  de la vie publique. La République américaine et la République
  française sont les deux filles aînées de la liberté. 1787, l’année
  de la Constitution américaine et 1789, l’année qui inaugure l’ère
  moderne en France, ce sont deux grandes dates de nos histoires, et
  deux grandes dates de l’histoire du monde.

  Avec un point de départ presque simultané, les deux pays out suivi
  leurs voies diverses, l’un occupé à se saisir d’un territoire
  immense, pliant aux nécessités de cette vie énorme et dispersée
  ses institutions à la fois fédéralistes et unitaires, ouvrant au
  vieux monde un asile tutélaire et développant sur son sol, grâce
  à cet afflux permanent du trop plein des forces humaines, une
  civilisation qui est l’héritière de toutes les civilisations;
  l’autre plus unitaire et plus centralisé; plus ramassé et plus
  fondu, plus traditionnel, mais plus alourdi par le poids du passé,
  travaillant à faire entrer, dans ses vieux cadres historiques,
  les puissances d’énergie que la vie moderne exige des sociétés
  qui veulent garder leur place et leur rang dans la grande famille
  humaine.

  Après cent ans de cet effort parallèle, les voici donc qui
  apparaissent toutes deux en pleine possession de leur valeur, et
  avec la conscience de ce qu’elles sont et de ce qu’elles doivent
  être. N’est-ce pas le moment pour elles deux de se considérer
  mutuellement et de s’apercevoir, une fois pour toutes, que dans
  cette marche parallèle, elles se complètent souvent et ne se
  contrarient jamais?

  Puisque je parle ici devant les représentants les plus autorisés du
  commerce américain, il me paraît facile de prendre le commerce en
  exemple.

  Le commerce est entre les peuples le premier et le plus
  indispensable des biens. Qui dit commerce dit bon vouloir
  réciproque, confiance mutuelle et paix. Il est incontestable, qu’à
  l’origine de toutes les civilisations se trouve le _commerce_, et
  quand les premiers navigateurs européens, à commencer par le plus
  grand de tous, Christophe Colomb,—ont été vers l’Occident à la
  recherche des terres nouvelles, que prétendaient-ils, sinon trouver
  des chemins et des débouchés nouveaux? C’est du commerce qu’on peut
  dire avec raison “Mens agitat molem.”

  Or, précisément, dans le commerce franco-américain, une heureuse
  entente de nos intérêts réciproques nous conduit à cette conviction
  que, là aussi, bien peu de choses nous séparent, tandis que
  beaucoup nous rapprochent. L’Amérique produit en abondance des
  matières premières dont notre industrie a besoin; la France produit
  des substances alimentaires, et des articles où se distingue
  spécialement le goût français, et dont le luxe croissant des
  Amériques aura sans doute toujours besoin. Sur ces bases, les
  conditions d’une harmonie bien équilibrée peuvent sans trop de
  difficultés se dégager. Aussi voyons nous que la France est de
  toutes les nations de l’Europe (l’Angleterre exceptée), celle qui
  fait le plus d’affaires avec les États-Unis proportionnellement
  au chiffre de sa population et à l’étendue de son territoire,
  confirmant ainsi l’observation que je faisais tout à l’heure, à
  savoir que les lois de l’histoire doivent combiner nos efforts, et
  que, seule, une erreur inexcusable pourrait les séparer.

  C’est pour étendre et appliquer cette opinion,—j’irai jusqu’à dire
  cette doctrine,—que le comité France-Amérique s’est fondé à Paris,
  et qu’il est venu devant vous pour travailler au développement des
  bonnes relations si heureusement existantes entre les deux pays.
  Dans tous les ordres de manifestations cordiales, on nous trouve
  et on nous trouvera. C’est là notre rôle et nous le revendiquons
  hautement.

  Relations économiques, relations intellectuelles, relations
  sociales, relations artistiques, dans tous ces ordres d’idées, nous
  travaillons dans le même sens et c’est à cette initiative de notre
  part que nous vous prions de répondre par des sentiments et des
  actes analogues. Nous sommes venus vers vous; venez vers nous à
  votre tour.

  On dit, de la pensée américaine, qu’elle se formule en termes
  d’action “to think in terms of action.” Eh bien! nous, nous avons
  formulé notre sentiment en termes d’action, en venant vingt bons
  compagnons j’ose le dire, appartenant aux diverses activités
  françaises, vous apporter pour une grande commémoration, une chose
  éminemment française, une _oeuvre d’art_.

  Nous avons mûrement réfléchi avant de prendre ce parti et nous
  vous prions d’y réfléchir à votre tour. Nous n’avons aucun titre
  officiel; nous sommes de simples particuliers, mais nous nous
  sommes choisis (si vous me permettez cette expression ambitieuse)
  dans le désir de ne pas être trop indignes de vous et de votre
  confiance.

  Il y eut un temps où pour la découverte des pays transatlantiques,
  les premiers pionniers sont partis volontairement de nos rivages:
  Champlain fut le plus glorieux parmi ces Français: ceux-là étaient
  _les volontaires de la foi et de l’espérance_. Il fut un temps
  où d’autres volontaires partirent pour servir une cause juste et
  légitime: ceux-là furent _les volontaires de la Liberté et de
  l’Indépendance_. Les temps sont changés; les grandes oeuvres sont
  accomplies. Cependant, nous aussi nous venons spontanément, pour
  maintenir, du moins, ce qu’ont fait nos aïeux, et nous sommes _les
  volontaires de l’Amitié_.

  Comment cette amitié qui est un sentiment et qui est la fleur
  de l’âme s’exprimerait-elle mieux que par une oeuvre d’art,
  c’est-à-dire la fleur du goût et du génie humain?

  L’art, en effet, est l’essence du travail des siècles et ses
  oeuvres seules survivent aux siècles. Une civilisation achevée
  s’exprime par l’art: l’art résume toujours ce que l’humanité sent
  et pense.

  Par quoi connaît-on la grandeur de l’âme artistique, sinon par les
  monuments artistiques, l’Egypte, la Grèce, Rome, le Moyen-Age nous
  ont transmis leur pensée par cette langue universelle et immortelle
  qui s’appelle l’art. Ce que l’humanité veut faire connaître
  d’elle-même à l’avenir, elle le confie à l’art.

  Et c’est pourquoi, comme un symbole de l’amitié franco-américaine,
  nous avons choisi une belle oeuvre d’art due à notre grand
  sculpteur Rodin.

  A bord d’un bâtiment nouveau et qui s’appelle “La France,” une
  délégation française est venue pour vous remercier de célébrer un
  Français.

  Par la pensée, par le commerce, par le goût du grand, du beau, du
  juste, par une foi identique dans la paix entre les hommes, les
  deux grandes démocraties que l’Océan seul sépare, sont faites pour
  s’aimer, se comprendre et s’unir.

  Nous demandons aux Chambres de Commerce américaines de seconder
  l’oeuvre d’union que nous avons enterprise.

  Merci aux Chambres de Commerce américaines. A tout jamais
  prospérité, grandeur, bonheur et gloire, à la grande République des
  États-Unis d’Amérique! (Loud applause.)

President Hepburn introduced the next speaker as follows: There are
few homes in this country in which the benign face of Washington
does not look down upon the family activities. Serious contemplation
of the face of Washington must soon bring into perspective the face
of that great Frenchman with whom he was so closely associated,
whom he so highly esteemed, Lafayette. We are fortunate in having
with us to-day a direct descendant of the great Lafayette, his
great-great-grandson. He is upon this delegation as the personal
representative of the Premier of the present government of France. I
take great pleasure in presenting Count de Chambrun.

Count de Chambrun spoke in English.


ADDRESS OF COUNT DE CHAMBRUN

  _Mr. President and Gentlemen_: The very character of the present
  solemnities which have brought this delegation to America awakens
  with us in France a peculiar feeling of sympathy and grateful
  retrospection. Our intellectual world, our literary men—all who are
  versed in historical research and who cherish the great memories
  of the past—look back with love and pride upon the one time humble
  heroes whose venturous spirit and whose wonderful foresight made of
  their own mother country the glorious promoter of civilization.
  Indeed, the ties uniting France and America have always been
  popular with us, and our public men have ever justly prized their
  great and valuable importance; but, in the present instance, the
  Prime Minister of the French Republic has desired to be personally
  represented. He, also, a patriot and a man of letters, cannot
  refrain from emotion when he recalls that page of our common
  history, when a countryman of ours with scanty means, but with
  vast courage and genius opened new lands and new prospects to the
  achievements of humanity.

  And this is why M. Raymond Poincaré wishes that his own tribute
  should not be lacking where honors are bestowed upon our brave
  Champlain; it is my good fortune, gentlemen, to be the bearer of
  this heartfelt tribute in memory of the early traveller now famous
  among our great explorers.

  Curiously enough, at different stages, it has been the destiny
  of Frenchmen to play on this proud continent a decisive part in
  the interest of the world’s progress. Whether as pioneers in the
  northern and western dominions, at a remote period when these lands
  were yet unknown, or later on, in time of need, when the United
  States sought freedom and independence, was it not Frenchmen who
  came again with helping swords in a new American cause, where, as
  volunteers and soldiers, their hearts became enlisted.

  But on the other hand, we citizens of France do not forget that it
  was upon your virgin soil that free institutions were first sown of
  which we in turn were able to fully harvest.

  The declaration of the American Independence preceded the
  declaration of the Rights of Man, and Republican Government in
  America preceded the establishment of Free Government in France.

  Mutual action at decisive moments, as we see, has blended together
  the histories of France and of the United States with ever
  beneficial effect, leaving to-day in the hearts of both nations
  an unparalleled feeling of esteem and constantly well-wishing
  affection. (Great applause.)

President Hepburn said: “Only a few years ago we wanted the world,
but now we want the air above it. We have with us to-day one of the
pioneers in navigation of the air, the man who first crossed the
English channel in a heavier than air machine. I present to you M.
Louis Blériot.” M. Blériot said:

  He had been carried away on the wings of the eloquence to heights
  where it was imprudent for an aviator to risk himself, and he
  would express simply, but with profound sincerity in behalf of
  French industry the great admiration which they, the workmen of old
  Europe, had for the great and daring efforts of America to conquer
  the air. That work brought men together, and united especially the
  citizens of America and France, already brothers by ancient bonds.
  Thanks to science and industry, distances were diminishing. They
  admired Edison and did not forget Fulton, as they recollected all
  those who had contributed by their invention or their initiative to
  widen the field of the activity of humanity. He looked forward to
  the time when the birds of France and the birds of America would
  settle on each others’ shores. (Applause.)

Addresses were also made in French by M. Louis Barthou, formerly a
member of the French Cabinet, and others. They were enthusiastically
received. At the luncheon which followed the meeting a toast was
given in honor of the President of France which was responded to by
M. Hanotaux, after which Baron D’Estournelles de Constant made an
eloquent address. Since their return to France and the election of M.
Raymond Poincaré to the Presidency of that Republic, M. Louis Barthou
has been made President of the Council of Ministers. It is very
gratifying to the many friends in America of M. Barthou that he has
been so signally honored by the French nation.

[Illustration: Ferry Transporting Commissioners and French Delegation
between Port Henry and Crown Point Memorial, May 3, 1912]




VI. FRENCH VISITORS AND CHAMPLAIN COMMISSIONERS ENTERTAINED AT
TICONDEROGA, LATER INSPECT CHAMPLAIN MEMORIAL LIGHTHOUSE AT CROWN
POINT, WHERE THEY FORMALLY PLACE THE BUST “LA FRANCE” AND THEN
JOURNEY TO PLATTSBURGH. REPORT TO PARIS


The members of the New York and Vermont Lake Champlain Commissions
accompanied by His Excellency, M. Jusserand, the French Ambassador,
Governor Mead of Vermont and the members of the French delegation
left New York on the night train, May 2d, in special cars, which
were detached from the train the next morning at Fort Ticonderoga
station. The French visitors were entertained at breakfast by Mr. and
Mrs. Stephen H. P. Pell at “The Pavilion,” their summer home, while
the members of the Joint Commissions were entertained at breakfast
by Commissioner Howland Pell in the Block House, rebuilt by him in
the Germain Redoubt overlooking the Lake. Several hours were spent
in looking over the ruins, fortifications and restorations, the
details of which were explained by Mr. and Mrs. Stephen H. P. Pell,
who own Fort Ticonderoga and Mount Independence. The visitors were
greatly interested in all they saw, and especially the French lines,
the scene of Montcalm’s victory in 1758 and the place where the
battle occurred. The ancient flag of France with the Fleur-de-lis
was displayed together with the Tri-color and each was saluted with
formality.

Members of the delegation and Ambassador Jusserand called on
Commissioner Pell at the Block House in the Germain Redoubt, where
light refreshments were served.

General Lebon and other members of the delegation were quick to see
the strategic importance of Ticonderoga as a military fortification
to command the passage of vessels up and down the lake as well as
the passage of troops through the valley. In their judgment France
made no mistake in taking possession of Ticonderoga and taking her
stand there and at Crown Point in her efforts to control this entire
territory. The history of the struggle has been graphically described
by Parkman and others and the thrilling events, culminating in and
about this “Gateway of the Country,” have been given realistic
settings by Ira Allen, Hon. Lucius E. Chittenden, Rev. Joseph Cook,
Dr. Hamilton W. Mabie, Percy MacKaye and others. These were well
known to most of the visiting savants, who were profoundly impressed
with Ticonderoga and the overtowering Mount Defiance on the southwest
and the commanding position of Mount Independence across the narrow
lake on the southeast. All these were occupied by military forces at
times during the struggle for the control of the territory.

The Commissioners and visitors left on a special train at 11.30
A. M. for Port Henry, where they were met by Commissioner
Walter C. Witherbee, Hon. Frank S. Witherbee, Lieut.-Gov. Thomas F.
Conway and others. While going from Ticonderoga to Port Henry, lunch
was served on the train, so that upon their arrival at Port Henry,
while they were being escorted to the steamer, the Witherbee band
played the Marseillaise, and to the delight of the French guests, it
also played the airs of several French folk songs familiar to the
visitors and known to their grandparents. They proceeded directly to
Crown Point Forts. This was their first experience on Lake Champlain,
their first view of the memorial in the process of construction. It
was far enough along, however, to reveal its stateliness and artistic
design. The impression it made on M. Fernand Cormon, President of the
French Academy, and on M. René Bazin, M. Étienne Lamy, M. Gabriel
Hanotaux and other members of the French Academy may be drawn from
the remarks of M. Hanotaux and others. Suffice it to say here that
the visitors were pleased with the artistic memorial lighthouse,
which, in addition to its utilitarian uses, is designed to symbolize
the illumination of the light of civilization first shed in the
valley by Champlain and his followers. After inspecting the memorial
they suggested the permanent location for the bust “La France,” which
had been temporarily placed in position and was inspected by the
people from all parts of the Champlain valley. The bust was draped
with the flags of the United States and the Tri-color of France and
from all parts of the memorial lighthouse floated pennants and the
Stars and Stripes in profusion.

[Illustration: Ambassador Jusserand and French Delegation
disembarking at Crown Point Memorial, May 3, 1912]

[Illustration: Commissioners and French Delegation at Crown Point
Memorial, May 3, 1912

By courtesy of the Troy Times]

Chairman H. Wallace Knapp presided at the formal exercises and in his
opening address said:

  _Gentlemen_: The course of the Tercentenary observations has
  received an interruption by a voice from across the sea. It is a
  friendly voice. It is a voice that is heard wherever men struggle
  to be free or seek to advance their welfare. It is the voice of
  France that spoke to us in the dark days of our early history, and
  bade us be of good cheer.

  All through the critical periods of our history the French people
  and their Government have been our friends. They join us to-day in
  memorializing our past. They have the right to do so, for France
  and America have suffered and triumphed together for the same high
  cause and the memory of our debt to this liberty-loving people can
  never be forgotten. It is fitting that they place the Memorial
  Tablet here. It expresses to us love and friendship and they may be
  assured that we will guard it with proud and zealous care.

I now take great pleasure in introducing to you the acting Governor,
Lieutenant-Governor Conway.

Lieut.-Gov. Thomas F. Conway in the course of his address of welcome
said:

  _Gentlemen_: I had the pleasure on Wednesday evening of extending
  to you on the part of the State of New York the appreciation of its
  citizens at your coming to our shores, but it is a double pleasure
  to welcome you to Lake Champlain, rich in French history and the
  pride of every one who may rightfully claim the Champlain valley as
  his birthplace. We believe that you will find this one of the most
  charming lakes you have ever visited and we trust that you will
  appreciate its beauties as do its inhabitants and its many visitors.

Chairman Knapp then introduced Gov. John A. Mead of Vermont.

Governor Mead in welcoming the visitors said:

  The people of the Green Mountain State join with the people of
  the Empire State in welcoming the members of the distinguished
  delegation from France who have come to bring the seal of the
  Mother-Country to the memorial of one of her most distinguished
  sons. The Vermont Commission in order to do honor to that
  distinguished son, Samuel Champlain, united with the New York
  Commission in erecting this stately joint memorial to commemorate
  his memory, which is revered by the people of both states. We count
  it the greatest privilege that can fall to the lot of any man to
  be born along the shores of this beautiful lake, which Champlain
  considered worthy to bear his name.

Chairman Knapp then presented the French delegation, saying: Many
Commissions have come from France to us, but all of France has never
been so well represented as it is by our guests to-day. They bring in
their hands the gift that has been contributed by all the classes of
all the French people.

I have the pleasure of introducing to you the Chairman of the
Delegation, M. Gabriel Hanotaux.


ADDRESS OF ALBERT AUGUSTE GABRIEL HANOTAUX

  The states of Vermont and New York raise this monument,
  torch-bearer to the glory of the first Europeans who saw their
  territories and who foresaw their future prosperity. A French
  delegation has come to thank the constructors of this magnificent
  monument and to seal upon its base, as a sign of gratitude, an
  image of France.

  This work of one of our greatest sculptors, Rodin, is of modest
  size, but it certainly expresses well what we have wished to say;
  it will bear testimony among you of the quality of French taste;
  it will depict to you France, such as we Frenchmen conceive it,
  such as we love it. See this countenance, smiling and at the same
  time grave, these delicate and pure features, these full cheeks
  indicating health, this firm look expressing resolution and
  sincerity. It is France as she wishes to be and as she is.

[Illustration: French Delegation and Commissioners at Crown Point
Memorial, May 3, 1912]

  The France of the Crusades, the France of Joan of Arc, of Louis XIV
  and of Napoleon, of the Revolution, the France of the Richelieus
  and of the Champlains, that France cannot forget those who have
  worked and suffered for her, she gathers together their memory, she
  thanks those who remember. To the friendships and smiles that
  are offered her, she replies by a smile and a sincere and faithful
  friendship.

  To mention only the most recent events: In 1910, a statue of
  the great Washington was offered to Versailles by the State of
  Virginia; in December, the Surrender of Yorktown, by J. P. Laurens,
  was solemnly inaugurated in the Court House of Baltimore. In 1911,
  commemorative monuments were erected at Savannah, at Annapolis, at
  Mobile. Everywhere we find memorable proofs of American sympathy.
  How could we do otherwise than respond?

  And it is for this reason, these acts and so many similar ones
  having been noted through the vigilance of the Ambassador of France
  at Washington, that the Committee of France-America, encouraged
  by the French Government, took the initiative of a subscription
  in order to bring to the lighthouse of Champlain a souvenir of
  French gratitude. The subscription includes, in the first rank,
  the President of the French Republic, Mr. Fallières; the President
  of the Council of Ministers, Raymond Poincaré, the Ambassador of
  France at Washington, Mr. Jusserand, the majority of the French
  ministers and a great number of our fellow-countrymen, anxious to
  express their gratitude and their sympathy to the American Republic.

  The delegation here present bears no official character, but Mr.
  Jusserand accompanies it as the representative of the French
  Government and the Count de Chambrun appears in it as the
  representative of the President of the Council. The greatest French
  institutions also have their representatives therein; The Institut
  de France, the Parliament, the French army, the State Council, the
  University, Industry, Commerce, the Press; finally, the descendants
  of three of the families that have, from the very beginning, shown
  their sympathy for the Franco-American cause.

  Friendship—it is with this word that I wish to close, as it
  expresses the real character of the sentiment that animates the
  Committee of France-America and which its delegation has endeavored
  to convey in coming to you. We are friends of the great American
  democracy; we come toward it with outstretched hands, saying:
  Accept this friendship that is offered you and in return grant us
  yours. We have nothing more to offer you than this image of that
  which we love best in the world, France; and we ask nothing more
  of you than to understand how lively, spontaneous and sincere this
  sentiment is.

  Since the American democracy is at the head of the great human
  civilizations, since it always marches forward, without, however,
  forgetting the bonds that bind it to the past; since it has a noble
  heart, a generous soul, and since, according to the word of the
  Latin writer, nothing human is foreign to it, we come to remind
  it that these sentiments are also those that animate the French
  democracy; and, as the two ideas are to-day united in the same
  monument, so may the two words be drawn closer together in the
  name of our Committee, France-America. We beg of you not to allow
  the memory of this ceremony to be effaced from your hearts, since
  the memory of Champlain is commemorated by you. We now confide to
  you the image of our beautiful France. Watch over it as over an
  eternal pledge of gratitude, of devotion, and of friendship. (Long
  applause.)

Commissioner Louis C. Lafontaine was then introduced and received the
gift in the following manner, speaking in the French language:

  _Excellence, Messieurs de la Délégation Française, Mesdames,
  Messieurs_: C’est un grand honneur pour moi, comme membre de
  la Commission du Troisième Centenaire de la découverte du Lac
  Champlain, et au nom de mes collègues, de recevoir le buste “La
  France” dont vous avez mission du peuple Français de venir déposer
  au pied du Mémorial Champlain.

  La Commission se plaît à voir dans ce beau geste de la mère-patrie
  de Champlain le couronnement de ses efforts pour la glorification
  de l’un des plus illustres fils de la France.

  Votre mission est maintenant remplie, mais nous vous prions de
  vouloir bien en accepter une autre, celle de transmettre à la
  nation française, les remerciements les plus sincères et les plus
  cordiaux de la Commission Champlain pour l’honneur qu’elle lui a
  fait en choisissant un si grand nombre parmi les plus illustres de
  ses enfants pour leur conférer l’honneur de venir apposer ce cachet
  d’amitié au Mémorial Porte-Lumière destiné à perpétuer le souvenir
  du Grand Champlain!

This concluded the formal exercises.

The visitors were then shown the ruins of Fort St. Frédéric and of
the English Forts, now included in the state reservation known as the
Crown Point Reservation, which are among the best preserved original
fortifications of the country.

[Illustration: M. Hanotaux speaking at Crown Point Forts, May 3, 1912]

[Illustration: M. Hanotaux speaking at Crown Point Memorial, May 3,
1912]

The discoveries which are being made in and about the old French Fort
under the direction of Annie E. (Mrs. Walter C.) Witherbee, are such
as may lead to the rewriting of a description of these forts. She has
located the ovens and found the oven doors, candle-sticks, snuffers,
glassware, blue and white china of Fort St. Frédéric, built in 1731,
the underground drain, from the English Forts, built of stone two
and one-half feet high, resting on a solid rock and twenty inches
in width in perfect condition. She has also found the casemate and
bastions around the English Forts, which were built in 1759
by Amherst. She has opened up the old forge and found many relics
such as a gun-carriage, chairs, knives, spades, iron bars, bolts and
other articles. The most remarkable discovery from a geological point
of view was that of a glacier mill 14 feet and 7 inches in depth,
containing spherical stones, unknown in the vicinity. Mrs. Witherbee
has procured copies of old charts and maps from British archives
relating to the region. She is also making a valuable historical
collection of books, manuscripts and autographs of persons, who have
written about or have been occupants of the forts now in ruins, but
included in the State Reservation. These will throw new light on the
history of the region to the lasting credit of Mrs. Witherbee, who
intends to continue her researches in this hitherto unexplored field.

At three-forty o’clock, P. M., the Commissioners,
accompanied by His Excellency Ambassador Jusserand and the French
delegation, boarded the special train for Plattsburgh under the
escort of Hon. John H. Booth and Hon. John B. Riley. Upon their
arrival at Plattsburgh, they were officially welcomed by Mayor Andrew
G. Senecal, the Guard of Honor, and St. Jean Baptiste Society in
full uniform. The depot was trimmed with the American and French
flags and the U. S. Reservation at Plattsburgh Barracks had been put
in readiness by Colonel Cowles, Post Commandant, for the reception
of the visitors to witness a dress parade in their honor. As they
entered the Reservation, a national salute was fired and the
regimental band played La Marseillaise and the Star Spangled Banner.
The Fifth Infantry in full dress uniform was drawn up and saluted the
distinguished visitors with military honors. Colonel Cowles and his
staff were formally presented by Hon. H. Wallace Knapp to Ambassador
Jusserand, M. Gabriel Hanotaux, General Lebon, Count de Chambrun, M.
Étienne Lamy and others. The visitors were escorted to the temporary
platform, whereupon the Hon. V. F. Boire, speaking in French in
behalf of the people of Plattsburgh, welcomed the visitors. The
English version of his address is substantially as follows:

  _Gentlemen_: It is a great pleasure as well as a special privilege
  to welcome you to the city of Plattsburgh and the county of Clinton
  on this important occasion of your peace errand. It is a pleasure
  to welcome you for many reasons. The personnel of your delegation
  has so many illustrious and honored names; so many of them dear to
  the hearts of the American people, that we welcome you individually
  and personally, and we feel that you should be at home here. In
  the average American heart, there is enshrined on either side of
  George Washington the memory of Rochambeau and Lafayette, so no man
  bearing either name is a stranger in the country of Washington, nor
  is he a stranger here, who is accredited from their native land.

  As representatives of the great French Republic, you are welcome to
  the nation that the old France sustained and befriended in the hour
  of its almost hopeless struggle for liberty. You are twice welcome
  in this particular spot; discovered and explored by the great
  Champlain, trodden by the intrepid foot of Montcalm, and sought out
  by the zealous heart of Jogues. It would be impossible to honor us
  more than to permit us to see and hear representatives of so many
  branches of French activities and learning, of men and institutions
  that have made for the progress and enlightenment of the world; and
  in this particular locality, where there are so many descendants of
  the French, this occasion affords an entirely distinct and peculiar
  pleasure to the people.

  Significant at this time and indirectly connected with your visit,
  and of interest in connection with your visit, are the great peace
  projects now planned between the United States and the British
  Empire. One is the Quebec-Miami International Highway which is an
  assured fact, as a result of which a great International Highway
  is actually being built, connecting the southern part of Florida
  with the city of Quebec, and linking Canada and the United States
  with a strong bond of friendship and good will. This road will
  pass through the city of Plattsburgh and its length will be dotted
  with monuments dedicated to peace. And it is intended that all
  travellers of this highway between Canada and the United States
  will pass beneath an arch dedicated in the hope that no hostile
  foot will ever tread beneath. This we believe to be a practical
  peace pact.

  The monuments and arch just referred to are part of the second
  and most widely known of the peace projects. By that I mean, the
  celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of peace between the
  English speaking peoples (which also seems to be an assured fact),
  to occur in 1914. By a singular coincidence, the year 1914 will
  also mark the one hundredth anniversary of the last war between
  French speaking and English speaking peoples. It would seem to me
  a most lamentable thing if this celebration were not made a double
  celebration in commemoration of the one hundred years of peace
  between the great French speaking peoples and English speaking
  peoples as well as between the English speaking peoples. And let
  us hope that the year 1914 will also witness the adoption of all
  the Arbitration Treaties under French speaking nations and English
  speaking nations;—and thus we may hope that the year 1914 will not
  only be as a monument to the century of peace in the past, but that
  it will also be a monument for the peace of the centuries that are
  to come.

The visitors demonstrated their pleasure over his remarks by
vigorous applause. M. Étienne Lamy was then introduced and, speaking
in French, told of the pleasure of himself and his associates at
the hearty reception they had received at every place they had
visited since coming to America and said that at no place was the
reception more cordial than at Plattsburgh. General Lebon was the
next speaker and his remarks were also in French. He spoke of the
great achievements of the French people in all walks of life and
especially in the military sphere. Count de Chambrun spoke in English
and told of the great friendship which has existed between France
and the United States ever since the first blow was struck by the
colonies for liberty; how the Republic of the East, through him and
his associates, sent greetings and promises of everlasting friendship
to the Republic of the West. M. Gabriel Hanotaux spoke briefly in
French and Ambassador Jusserand made a few remarks in both English
and French, expressing his pleasure in again visiting Plattsburgh.
The Saranac Chapter of the D. A. R. turned out in force with their
regent. Mrs. George F. Tuttle, and were accompanied by the Nathan
Beman Chapter of the Children of the American Revolution bearing the
American colors. The D. A. R. delegation was seated on the grandstand
at the left of the French visitors.

Mrs. George F. Tuttle, the regent of the Saranac Chapter, D. A. R.,
and president of the Nathan Beman Chapter, D. A. R., of Plattsburgh,
both of which organizations took part in the reception of the French
Delegation, expressed her pleasure and that of her Chapter at taking
part in welcoming the visitors, and also said:

  The Saranac Chapter, Daughters of the American Revolution and
  Nathan Beman Society, Children of the American Revolution wish
  to extend greetings to the French delegation who have so
  honored us by their presence. It may be of interest to one of
  this distinguished company, the Count de Chambrun, to know that
  among the Daughters who listened with delight to his remarks,
  was one whose mother, Mrs. Frederick Sailly, had the pleasure of
  entertaining, as the wife of Major Russell, at Fort Niagara, the
  Count’s honored ancestor, General Lafayette.

After regimental dress parade the visitors were returned to the
depot by automobile and left for Montreal on the regular 6 o’clock
train, expressing themselves enthusiastically in appreciation of the
festivities arranged in their honor in this country.

One of the French delegation, M. Gaston Deschamps, on May 3, 1912,
reported to _Le Temps_, published in Paris, the exercises at Crown
Point and Plattsburgh, which is a graphic description of the
impressions made upon the visitors on that occasion. From that report
we excerpt the following, giving the English instead of the French
original:

  People have come from all the cities and towns about Port Henry;
  from all the villages and hamlets near the Canadian frontier, to
  greet the French delegation. A band of musicians advances and
  plays the “Marseillaise”—a Marseillaise slow, sweet, as though
  languishing from the affectionate and cajoling tenderness of our
  friends in the United States and New France. Our Marseillaise lends
  itself admirably to that metamorphosis, and the warlike march
  of the Army of the Rhine easily becomes, when one beats _adagio
  maestoso_ time, a hymn of solemn measure and touchingly religious.

  Hon. Walter C. Witherbee, one of the most distinguished citizens
  of Port Henry, is the President of the Inauguration Committee of
  the Champlain Monument at Crown Point. For several years he has
  devoted the best part of his time and his efforts to the work of
  the American and French commemorations of which we to-day see
  the happy outcome. He has applied himself with all his heart to
  this intellectual and moral enterprise, and he has brought to
  the service of his tenacious idealism all the practical judgment
  of an excellent business man. I have learned—not from him, for
  Mr. Witherbee is modesty itself—all that he has done for the
  celebration of the third centenary of Champlain. Treasurer of the
  New York Commission, he is the one especially who, with Senator
  Henry W. Hill and Mr. John R. Myers, put through the necessary
  measures before the Government at Washington, to the end that the
  commemorative festivities might be exceptionally brilliant.

  Mr. Clinton Scollard has sung the glory of Champlain:

      A valiant son of that intrepid line
      Which gave fair lustre to the fame of France.

  Another poet, Mr. Percy MacKaye, has celebrated in his “Ballad of
  Ticonderoga” the heroic defenders of Fort Carillon. Dr. Daniel
  L. Cady has dedicated a whole bouquet of lyric verses to the
  picturesque beauties of Lake Champlain and to the bravery of the
  good sailor of Saintonge:

      The Brouage sailor * * *
      * * * Long live the Xaintongeois * * *

  It seems to me that at certain times “Young America” is in truth
  “Old France.” This impression is strengthened still more after we
  have embarked on the steamer which is to take us to the opposite
  shore of the lake, to the promontory where the monument to the
  heroes of this magnificent fête is erected. This monument is not
  yet finished. But the figure of the “Lord of Champlain, geographer
  to the King, and captain of the Navy of the West,” is present in
  all minds because on the pedestal of granite, under the gleam of
  the lighthouse, it is visible from top to toe in the eyes of all
  sailors in quest of a good route in these parts. Here he is, with
  his good face, a trifle broad, and very strong, his moustache
  curled up at the ends, and his small pointed beard in the fashion
  of Louis XIII.; his lips, prompt to reply, but skillful in keeping
  a secret; his large, thoughtful forehead, his eyes full of
  dreaminess, and at the same time skilled in the exact knowledge
  of men and things by the habit of his profession of watching the
  caprices of the inconstant sea, of the changing heavens, and of
  the varying breezes. His lake, that “Sea of the Iroquois,” whose
  Odysseyan distances he skimmed in birch-bark canoes paddled by
  tattooed Hurons, with whom he felt at home—being, in the words of a
  narrator of his voyages, “a man who was astonished at nothing, and
  a ready talker, knowing how to accost these people tactfully and
  to accommodate himself to their ways”—his lake we overlook to-day
  from the bulwarks of a steamer decorated with all the splendor of
  holidays. His work is finished. What he foresaw, what he predicted,
  what he prepared, has been realized. Civilization has laid hold
  upon all these countries where he was the first explorer and of
  which he foretold in his writings the future harvest. Here is
  the landscape whose picture he has described so vividly that one
  can, after having read his “Voyages and Discoveries”, easily find
  one’s way and recognize the different points; the immensity of
  this lake, whose fertile shores stretch in endless perspective;
  the hillsides covered with forests; the islands “where there are
  plenty of walnuts and vines and pretty meadows.” * * * In place
  of the encampments stockaded by the Iroquois or by the Mohegans,
  filled with the noise of the tom-tom and the war dance, there are
  now pleasant country houses where men and women of a less turbulent
  race can henceforth enjoy a happiness which is no longer menaced by
  the unreasoned impulses of a primitive and barbarous humanity.

  As our steamer pulls out from the port and traverses the waves,
  gilded by the sun, in the track which the achievements of
  Champlain have traced, we see the buildings of Port Henry rise
  one above the other like an amphitheatre among the forests in
  the woodland clearing. On the battlefield where the conqueror,
  peaceful and brave, was forced to use his blunderbuss, there are
  now shipbuilders’ yards, warehouses, factory chimneys. * * * The
  horizon, under the vast dome of the blue sky, is beautified by the
  whiteness of the snows, which shine with a silvery splendor on the
  tops of the Adirondack Mountains and of those Green Mountains which
  have given their ancient French name to the American State Vert
  Mont (Vermont).

  The weather is marvellous. This is the most beautiful day of our
  trip; a day of brightness and of glory; what the Americans call a
  “glorious day.” A fine breeze which comes from afar makes the gay
  colors of the oriflamme flutter from the halyards of the ship.
  The French delegation is gay. We are happy to see this admirable
  scenery, which was discovered by the eyes of a Frenchman. One
  of our number is especially captivated by the beauty of this
  spectacle; it is the great painter Cormon, appointed more than
  any one else, as one who could understand and feel the charm of
  this vision, because his art is exercised and triumphs by turns in
  the magnificent understanding of primitive times and in the fine
  meaning of the beauties imagined by the modern æsthetic. We are
  happy to see that his ready and true pencil has caught in passing
  some of the scenes from the fairyland before us. Our notes on the
  trip will thus be much more accurate because of a true, exact and
  sincere illustration, which would have been the delight of honest
  Champlain.

  In honor of the heroes of this festival, and to please us, Mr.
  Witherbee’s musicians play the airs which were most pleasing to
  the good mariners who came with Champlain from Saintonge or from
  Aunis—the old songs of Old France. “C’est le roi Dagobert,” “J’ai
  du bon tabac dans ma tabatière,” “La bonne aventure, ô gué.” * * *

  Apropos of this, a Canadian whom I met at this delightful festival
  of French remembrance told me that these songs, brought by
  Champlain’s sailors, preserved by Montcalm’s sailors, still exist
  among “our people” all through the country.

  “Among us are still played on the hurdy-gurdy those refrains of
  long ago. We transmit them in the family, from father to son, like
  a charming echo of the far away mother country. If you come to
  our French villages in Canada, Monsieur, to Beauharnais, to Saint
  Hilaire, to Maisonneuve, to Sorel, to Trois-Rivières, you will hear
  all sorts of pleasant couplets which come in a direct line from
  Angoumois, from Normandy, from Saintonge, from Poitou—and I, too,
  come from Poitou.

  “So, then. Monsieur,” adds my Canadian questioner, laughingly,
  “We will sing you some Poitevine songs, which will recall your
  childhood days and the quaint melodies of the country-folk over
  there. We have a good collection of them. You will only have the
  embarrassment of choice.”

  And that good Frenchman of Canada begins to name over for me a
  whole string of ancient sayings, which have retained the perfume
  and, as it were, the melancholy softness of the gardens of the
  past. First of all a “danse ronde”:

      Dans ma main droite y-a-t-un rosier
      Qui fleurira, manon lon la,
      Qui fleurira au mois de mai.
      Entrez en danse, joli rosier!
      Et embrassez, manon lon la,
      Et embrassez qui vous plaira.

  Indeed, I have heard that ingenious melody at home. To hear again,
  so far from home, the words and the spirit of our old rural France,
  hard-working all the week and always ready to dance and to “baller”
  during the Sunday leisure, is an impression not to be forgotten and
  which at first seems like a dream.

  “We also have,” my Canadian said to me, “the ‘Clear Fountain.’
  Everybody in Canada knows that romance, which came from
  Normandy. We also have some ‘chansons de filasse’ (flax songs)
  sung in tremulous voice by our good grandmothers: ‘En filant
  ma quenouille.’ Our Bretons have preserved their sea songs: ‘A
  Saint-Malo, beau port de mer.’ Or ‘Dans les prisons de Nantes.’ And
  also:

      Fringue, fringue sur la rivière
      Fringue, fringue sur l’aviron.”

  While thus, in that fine light, on the limpid water, under the
  tender blue of a crystal sky, the heroic and charming soul of our
  ancestors was evoked, our ship, surrounded by a whole fleet of
  decorated barks, draws near the pier at Crown Point and stops in
  front of the monument of Champlain. This monument is a lighthouse,
  of gray granite, sparkling with grains of mica which shine in
  the sun like the facets of precious stones. The location of
  that edifice is well adapted to the calling and the glory of him
  who was in these parts the guide of navigators. In front of that
  lighthouse, on the prow of a symbolic vessel, there stands upright
  the figure of the good pilot whose wake we have followed. * * *
  While awaiting the completion of the statue, which has been begun,
  we have fastened to the pedestal the image of France, modelled
  with infinitely delicate love by the strong hand of the sculptor
  Rodin. That will be a token and, as it were, the sign of the mother
  country on the monument which commemorates and consecrates a French
  achievement.

  At the moment when that image, veiled by the flags of France
  and of the United States, is uncovered, appears to the gaze of
  the assembled crowd, the Marseillaise vibrates in the resonant
  light. Our American friends and the Canadians present applaud and
  cheer. We are deeply moved, we Frenchmen, before this figure,
  where we recognize clearly the force and the sweetness of the
  mother country, the uprightness of her thoughts, the loftiness of
  her sentiments, the nobility of her generous desires. Never has
  an artist’s idea better expressed by the sovereign gift of art
  all that there is of depth, of rarity, of the unique, in hearts
  animated by the imperative desire to maintain the dominion of
  France; to enhance her glory. The head of the French delegation,
  M. Gabriel Hanotaux, of the French Academy, former Minister of
  Foreign Affairs, accompanied by the French Ambassador and the
  Governors of the States of New York and of Vermont, delivers that
  precious pledge of remembrance and of hope to the friendship of
  the American people. His eloquent words are most appropriate to
  the occasion which reunites us, to the decorations which astonish
  us, to the character of the great man whose admirable work gives
  us, at the end of three centuries, the joy of seeing in this place
  the infinite results of a French undertaking. The orator, in
  reviewing the life and work of Champlain, points out how similar
  to Corneille was the soul of that contemporary of Richelieu, and
  how this discoverer of new ways, this builder of towns, this
  initiator of civilization into the New World, this idealist, prompt
  in the realization of his ideas, has succeeded by the power of a
  thoughtful desire, preparing his projects far in advance by prudent
  thought, wisely conceived, rapidly executed—having, in a word, as a
  historian has said in the temperate and forceful language of long
  ago, “the intentions of all he did.”

  After M. Hanotaux, the Governors of New York and Vermont spoke.
  Their excellent discourses, warmly applauded, reminded me again
  how well the history of Champlain is known in America. In him they
  honor by turns the incarnation of the genius of France; the honor
  and chivalry of France. To that explorer, to that colonizer, they
  give that beautiful name of “honest man” which our ancestors of
  the seventeenth century claimed more passionately than any other
  title: navigator, explorer, honest man. * * *

  After that moving ceremony we were taken in automobiles to the
  ruins of Fort Frédéric, which was constructed in 1731 by the
  Marquis de Beauharnois. The whole population of Port Henry comes
  with us; they surround us, showing us every courtesy.

  In a group of children I see a pretty little boy with blue eyes.

  “Doest thou know French”?

  “Yes, sir.”

  “What is thy name”?

  “Henri Pigeon.”

  With a name so extremely French one does not need a certificate
  of origin. A French priest, Father Guttin, professor in the
  College of Saint-Michel at Burlington, on the other shore of Lake
  Champlain, told me that Henri Pigeon is one of many children of a
  very honorable and hard-working Canadian family. The father of that
  child works in the mines at Port Henry.


PLATTSBURGH, Same Day, _May 3, 1912_, 5:30 o’clock.

  The train, since leaving Port Henry, has traversed the left bank of
  Lake Champlain. As we pass I notice shores of golden sand, hills
  thickly shaded by foliage, pines, whose brilliant verdure glows on
  the azure of the blue water. Here is the island of Valcour. * * *
  What a pity not to be able to stop at all the stations on that
  railroad, with its many villages with French names.

  Plattsburgh is nearly the last American town before reaching
  the Canadian frontier. It is full of remembrances of the War of
  Independence. The Federal Government of the United States has
  established a strong garrison there. Here again swift automobiles
  await us. The owner of one of these brilliant vehicles literally
  carries me to the threshold of the station, at a lively pace, and
  on the way said to me, in a calm, jolly voice:

  “I am French, Monsieur; this is my son Raymond. We have only half
  an hour to see our countrymen. And, well, we want to make the best
  of it.”

  All this was said with a pleasing country accent. It is the accent
  we use in our country. * * * The auto stops at the entrance to
  a training field, where the Fifth Regiment of Infantry of the
  Regular Army of the United States is ranged in order of battle. The
  American Government wishes, at that last station in her territory,
  to do us great honor, due, no doubt, to the presence as a member of
  our delegation of General Lebon, former Commander-in-Chief of our
  First Army Corps.

  The General takes his place on a platform in front of the
  public stand. The regiment band plays the Marseillaise, which
  is followed by the solemn notes of the American hymn, the Star
  Spangled Banner. The Mayor of Plattsburgh addresses us in
  French, bidding us welcome. The procession starts immediately.
  A very excellent showing of troops, by a young colonel (Calvin
  D. Cowles), who manages a fiery horse most excellently, and who
  is surrounded by a body-guard of officers dressed in uniforms
  heavily adorned with gold braid and shoulder pieces of blue
  silk. A faultless procession; the sections well in line, the
  pace lively, the carriage very military. When the starry flag
  passed, everybody stood up and removed their hats. This scene
  is framed in a background of mountains and the blue line of the
  lake, now lighted by the slanting rays of the setting sun. After
  the military carriages had passed the colonel, accompanied by
  his staff, came and stood before the stand, and with a sweeping
  gesture saluted us with his sword. The American nation could not
  bid a more magnificent farewell to a delegation in which figure the
  descendants of Rochambeau and Lafayette, and who belong to a nation
  faithful to the traditions of a memorable fraternity in arms.


SAINT JEAN, Same Day, _May 3, 1912_, 7 o’clock.

  We have crossed the frontier. The evening falls over the Canadian
  fields. From a clock exactly like those in the French parishes
  there comes the aerial call of the Angelus. * * * Instantly, in
  the station of Saint Jean there is heard a great clamor. “Vive
  la France!” Imagine an immense crowd, packed around the train,
  preventing it from starting; waving three-colored banners; singing
  at the top of their lungs the songs of this land and of the home
  land; the songs which, among us, are sung to welcome parents and
  friends. Hands are extended; eyes seek other eyes. One might call
  it the reunion of a family a long time separated. We are happy to
  meet again. We detain each other. * * * There are so many things
  to say to each other. * * * Everyone who has been present at this
  Canadian welcome will treasure in the depths of his heart the
  remembrance of that moment never to be forgotten.

  This journey has been fertile in rapid and diverse impressions,
  carried away, alas! too quickly by the flight of time. It was at
  times like artificial fire; too quickly vanished. * * * But this
  here—and I purposely make use of a familiar phrase, which will be
  well understood by the French on both shores of the Atlantic—this,
  is in truth the bouquet! (Ceci, c’est véritablement le bouquet).

                                            GASTON DESCHAMPS.




VII. THEY VISIT CANADA, NIAGARA FALLS AND SAIL FOR FRANCE.
IMPRESSIONS AND COMMENTS BY FRENCH VISITORS ON EXPERIENCES IN AMERICA


Their reception by the Board of Trade and Chamber of Commerce and
Citizens Association in Montreal was very hospitable. A banquet was
tendered the visiting delegation in the evening of May 4th and on
the following day a luncheon was given them by the Franco-American
Committee of Canada. Their reception at Quebec on May 6th was also
very cordial. They were greatly interested in the city founded three
centuries back by Samuel Champlain. They visited its churches, its
Parliament buildings, the Heights of Abraham, and placed a wreath
of flowers on the tomb of Montcalm. They were pleased with the
majestic sweep of the St. Lawrence, the Falls of Montmorency and
with the bracing air of Quebec, whose surrounding hills were white
with snow. Among the many who united in entertaining them while in
Canada were Senator Raoul Dandurand, President of the Franco-American
Committee of Canada, Sir Lomer Gouin, Premier of the Province, M.
Monk, Minister of Public Works, Lieutenant-Governor Langelier, M.
Montagu Allan, Vice-President of the Franco-American Committee of
Montreal, Mgr. Bégin of Laval University, Messrs. R. W. Reford and
Chaput, Presidents of the Canadian Chambers of Commerce, M. Revol,
President of the Montreal Chamber of Commerce, M. Montpetit and M.
de Crèvecœur, M. Ferdinand Roy, President of the Canadian Institute
at Quebec, and many others. The mental exhilaration of the visitors
increased as they moved about amid the French speaking people of
the Province, where the descendants of French colonists with French
customs dominated its language, its laws and its institutions. On
their return to France they spoke very appreciatively of their
visit to the Dominion of Canada, its hospitable people and of its
possibilities.

On their return from Canada via Niagara Falls, they were met
there by Senator Henry W. Hill, Secretary of the Commission, and
were entertained at luncheon by General Francis V. Greene, who in
faultless Parisian French paid a glowing tribute to their countrymen.
He escorted them about the Falls and showed them the power plants on
the Canadian shore and took them in a special car around the Gorge
Route. They were deeply interested in the Falls, the Whirlpool and
power houses. They took the evening train for New York, where they
embarked on _La Provence_, May 9th, for France.

Commissioners Howland Pell and Senator James A. Foley and Viscount
de Jean of the French Embassy at Washington, Senator Raoul Dandurand
of Montreal and others were on the dock to bid them “farewell” and
“bon voyage.” Each gentleman of the delegation was presented with
a photograph of the Waldorf-Astoria banquet and each lady with a
bouquet of La France roses.

All the delegates were charmed with the cordiality of their
reception, both in the United States and Canada, and most of them
expressed their intention of coming again.

M. Gabriel Hanotaux, former Minister of Foreign Affairs and president
of the delegation, in a conversation before _La Provence_ left the
quay, said:

  I believe that the time has come for closer relations to be
  developed between France and America from many points of view.
  There is one point beyond doubt. We have seen recently that when
  France withdraws her financial support from any international
  project the carrying out of the project is at any rate delayed.
  France is a rich country, and has money to invest, but she must
  first see that her interests are safeguarded. In America the thing
  that struck me and most of the delegation was the prodigious
  activity everywhere. Everything in the country gives evidence of
  unique strength which must play a great rôle in the world. I am
  really charmed with my first visit to the United States and Canada
  and hope to have an opportunity of coming again. We in France
  are convinced that trade can be improved to a great extent. The
  present statistics do not, however, give France her proper place,
  as a great deal of the French trade passes across the Atlantic
  on British, Belgian and German vessels and is credited to the
  first port of debarkation, although many of the American exports
  eventually go to France.

M. Gabriel Hanotaux, in referring to French literature, said:

  The greatest error appears to exist in American and British minds
  on the subject of French literature. I myself know that the French
  love a pure literature and I am certain that that kind of writing
  is the only kind that is profitable in France itself. All the
  modern French writers, too, are of the same opinion. The indelicate
  French books appear to be written only for the foreigner, for they
  have no vogue whatever in France.

On a prior occasion M. Gabriel Hanotaux expressed the pleasure of
the delegation at the reception given it in this country, saying
that from the moment they had placed foot upon this soil they have
been captivated and carried away in a whirlwind of cordiality and
good-fellowship. About the reception by President Taft the French
statesman said:

  The President, despite his overwhelming occupations, received
  us at his table; in the very kindest manner he honored, in our
  persons, the thought which has brought us here. He was so kind as
  to give us personally, in connection with our visit, assurances of
  his encouragement and approval; which have been for us an ample
  reward. These countless acts of friendship of all kinds we have
  looked upon—and rightly so—as being addressed to our beloved mother
  country and to the Government of the French Republic which has so
  splendidly encouraged and aided us in the accomplishment of our
  mission.

On its return from America, the French delegation which had attended
the Champlain exercises, was entertained in Paris at a grand dinner,
on June 17, 1912. It was a truly brilliant assemblage, presided
over by M. Raymond Poincaré, President of the Council, and Minister
of Foreign Affairs. Prominent among the large number at the tables
were the sculptor, Rodin; Paul Hervieu, of the French Academy;
Louis Barthou, deputy and former Minister; General Brugère, former
vice-president of the Conseil Supérieur of War, and president of the
United States section of the Franco-American Committee; and many
others eminent in the official, military, naval, financial, literary
and art circles of France. The aviator, Blériot, was a guest,
representative of a putative new science. Many ladies also graced the
occasion.

Among the Americans in attendance was the American Ambassador, the
Hon. Myron Herrick, to whom the presiding officer, M. Poincaré, in
his opening remarks, most happily referred as having come “to testify
that his country, less near to us by parentage than is Canada, is
still just as near at heart.” American hospitality, he said, which
surprises and charms the French, whenever they cross the ocean, is
but an expression of a constant memory. “As Monsignor Ireland so well
says: ‘The United States forget nothing. In learning the history of
his own country, an American learns to love France. The Past has
not ceased to be felt in the Present. American sentiment is unable
to detach itself from France. Emigrants, it is true, arrive in vast
numbers on our soil; but there is a something, I know not what, in
the air we breathe, that assimilates them in less than a generation.
And the new-comers become like the earlier ones.’”

M. Gabriel Hanotaux, of the French Academy, President of the
Franco-American Committee, reviewed the experiences of the French
delegation in their journey to Lake Champlain, and in his very
felicitous remarks, “addressed, across the seas, a salutation of
thanks and of gratitude, on the part of France to the United States
of America and to the Dominion of Canada, in response to the welcome
extended by these two countries, last month, to the French delegation
visiting Lake Champlain.” He drew a lively picture of incidents of
the journey, especially of the arrival at Ticonderoga:

  “It is impossible to express the emotion which we felt when we saw
  that there was the goal of our journey; that our feet would tread
  in the footsteps of our great compatriots of by-gone ages; that
  this little bay was where Champlain embarked, in the Indian canoes,
  to go to discover, southwards, the land where sprang up Boston and
  New York; that here were those famous passes, defended, later on,
  foot by foot by the French heroes of the 17th and 18th centuries;
  that these ruins are of Fort Carillon; that these fields, these
  hills and woods, were the battle ground where Montcalm had fought
  and conquered; and that here, in a word, was the lake toward which
  we had fared all these weeks, and where we came to enshrine, at
  the foot of the commemorative monument, the image which we had
  brought, with precious care—from the land of France, on the ship
  _La France_, the image of France!”

The speaker paid graceful tribute to the genius of Rodin; dwelt upon
the welcome which the delegation had met with in Canada; thanked all
who had contributed to the pleasure and success of the mission, and
concluded by proposing the health of the President of the United
States, His Majesty George the Fifth, the people of all Latin
America, of the delegation’s hosts in the United States and Canada,
and of the Franco-American Committee.

He was followed by Senator Dandurand, President of the
Franco-American Committee of Montreal, who spoke of Canadian
development, and of the relations of Canada and the United States.
At the close of his address he was invested with the insignia of the
Legion of Honor.

Then followed the address of the Deputy, Louis Barthou, which
sparkled with wit and happy hits. The speaker paid particular tribute
to M. Hanotaux; dwelt upon the enthusiasm with which their delegation
had been met, and made repeated acknowledgment of the courtesies
they had received. His Excellency, M. Puga-Borne, Minister from
Chili, spoke briefly, and was followed by the American Ambassador,
Mr. Herrick, who happily acknowledged the compliments and courtesies
bestowed upon him and his country, and closed by proposing the health
of the President of the French Republic. The exercises were concluded
by a brief address from the presiding officer, M. Raymond Poincaré,
who referred to the part which the Franco-American Committee had
borne in the carrying out of the Champlain commemorative project.

On May 25, 1912, the newly-appointed Ambassador from the United
States to France, Mr. Myron T. Herrick, and Mrs. Herrick, gave a
reception at the American Embassy to the French delegation which
represented France in the Champlain ceremonies. Some seventy guests
were present, and were welcomed by the Ambassador in a felicitous
speech, to which M. Hanotaux replied most happily in behalf of the
delegation. M. Antonin Dubost also spoke on the unbroken amity so
long existing between France and the United States.

The _Courrier des États-Unis_ of November 10, 1912, published an
address delivered at the annual meeting of the Five Academies by
M. Paul Vidal de la Blache, delegate of the Academy of Moral and
Political Science. On the occasion referred to, M. Frédéric Masson,
of the French Academy, presided. M. de la Blache said in opening his
address:

  “_Gentlemen_: In the course of a journey which a French delegation
  made last spring, to pay homage to the memory of Samuel Champlain,
  there was one day interesting above all others. I am sure none
  of our company will lose the memory of it. Many have eloquently
  expressed the impression which they cherish. Impressions of travel
  are usually fleeting; they become dim by their very multiplicity,
  and the daily train of events soon relegates them to the limbo of
  the forgotten. However, the memory of this day has not ceased after
  several months to spring freshly to mind. Such is the quality of
  countries which are stamped by the seal of history. To know the
  regions upon which the eyes of Champlain rested, to press under
  foot the fragments of palisades upon which was spilled the blood of
  the soldiers of Montcalm, is assuredly a moving experience.”

The speaker found that a visit to places thus endowed with
associations, was like reviewing history condensed. He sketched
the course of history in the Champlain valley, recalled the scenes
of strife between Iroquois and Huron, English and French, English
and “Americans of the Union.” “These memories,” he said, “crowded
upon our thought and took form as we visited the scene which served
to frame them.” The speaker lightly reviewed the varied scene as
presented to the French visitors passing northward from New York
to Ticonderoga. When he found himself on the battlefield of July
8, 1758, he exclaimed: “How fiction pales before history!” The
memories of Montcalm and his army are so vivid that he sees again the
memorable conflict of the old days. “This corner of historic earth,”
he said, “by turn the property of the State of New York and of
Columbia University, in 1818 passed into the hands of an old New York
family. The descendants of Mr. William F. Pell honor themselves in
preserving the souvenirs of the past, which they have in keeping.” He
described the work of restoration which has been done at Ticonderoga,
and dwelt with pleasure on the reception accorded the visitors at the
old house with its souvenirs, its old furniture, pictures and relics,
and with its distinctive portico, or veranda, which M. de la Blache
found an interesting feature of Anglo-American Colonial architecture,
from New England to Virginia.

Crossing to Crown Point, he reviewed in like strain the scenes and
the associations of the place. At Crown Point, the speaker was
overwhelmed by the memory that here, in 1609, came Champlain with his
Algonquin allies. In a few picturesque sentences, he sketched the
first conflict in this region, of white man against Iroquois, not
forgetting to emphasize the higher mission which Champlain sought to
accomplish.

Of the exercises which were held at this point, where M. Hanotaux
delivered a notable address, M. de la Blache spoke at length. It
was, he said, a ceremony very beautiful in its simplicity. “Around
us familiarly crowded the people of the neighborhood, worthy farmers
with something of a Puritan aspect, an attentive throng in which
mingled many French Canadians; for we had come near to the actual
boundary line of the languages.” “While the orator recalled the
expressions by which Champlain described the country which revealed
itself to us, our attention sought and found the distinctive features
in the setting of this scene. Opposite, on the western shore, reared
the massive granite of the Adirondacks, wooded, and partly covered
with snow, the silhouette of which recalled, in grander proportion,
that of the mountains of Morvan, seen from the south. On the other
side, the more distant outline of the Green mountains, bathed in the
luminous calm of a spring-time day.”

In similar vein, the speaker described his progress down the lake to
Plattsburgh, where he recalled the associations of 1814. Thence on
to the first Canadian town of St. John: “The fading day permitted us
only to dimly see in the shadows of evening the Grand Isle, Isle La
Motte, Isle aux Noix, which Champlain describes as ‘These beautiful
islands filled with the finest woods and prairies,’” etc. The speaker
passed on in his address to recall his visit to Montreal and Quebec,
with tributes to the heroes of France who have made this region
famous. “There remains to-day in our minds,” he says, “a sentiment
of high regard for those who inspired in 1909 the commemoration
of the tercentenary of Champlain’s discovery. Resulting from the
initiative of the states of New York and Vermont, and endorsed by
Federal authority and later honored by the participation of France,
this celebration has taken a more general character than the mere
glorification of a great man. It signifies the adoption by America
of all the heroes who have contributed to our greatness. This homage
was not confined to Champlain; it is shared with Montcalm, it is
addressed to La Salle, to Marquette, whose statue appears in the
Capitol at Washington; to Maisonneuve, the founder of Montreal,
to whom is reared a statue upon one of the city places; to La
Clède, whose statue is reared in one of the parks of St. Louis; to
Joliet, to d’Iberville, to Hennepin and Duluth, and to many others
who, on Lake Champlain, on the Ohio, on the Great Lakes, or on the
Mississippi, were the pioneers of a dominion, which should come to
be realized some day, but far after them and otherwise than they
would have conceived. Doubtless America honors herself in honoring
and adopting our glories. With this act of courtesy mingles a strong
sentiment of pride. It costs us nothing, however, to associate
ourselves with an homage which concerns us, and from which we can
draw a sense of consolation.

“The names which I have recalled are more popular in America than
in their own country. We show ourselves forgetful of their fame,
as if to make their memories bear the blame of our failings. A
somewhat pusillanimous feeling makes us neglect this part of our
historic inheritance, as one turns aside from painful memories, the
bitterness of which he fears. These regrets assuredly are justified.
‘_Sic vos non vobis_’: such is the phrase which springs to the lips.
I do not believe, however, that such should be the last word, nor the
final sentiment at which we ought to stop. In an address delivered
three years ago, July 4, 1909, on the occasion of the Champlain
Tercentenary fêtes, Cardinal Gibbons said: ‘We are much indebted
to France for the great men whom she has sent to our country.’
Must one see in these words only a passing compliment? Rather do I
perceive therein the emphasis of history. These Frenchmen, above all
others, had prophetic vision of the extent and dimensions which this
continent could afford to political domination. They perceived with
larger vision than the tenacious colonists who applied their Puritan
virtue and their practical sense to inlaying their settlements,
one by one, between the sea and the Appalachians. These were the
founders; but we may ask whether, without the perspectives opened
by our countrymen, without their example and the emulation which it
stimulated, this powerful unity, of which our epoch has seen the
accomplishment from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from the Great Lakes
to the Gulf of Mexico, would be realized. There is a something in
the views, the plans, of this generalizing spirit, characteristic of
our compatriots. Thinking of France, they have outlived the grandeur
of the United States. Since by commemorations and by monuments,
America honors herself by reminding us that in her eyes, as happy
inheritor, a part of her present grandeur is the work of Frenchmen
of other days, it becomes us to take her at her word. In the work of
civilization, as it evolves, each bit of metal which the old nations
throw into the crucible adds a quality and communicates its own
resonance to the ingot which comes out. Doubtless it is to recover
this past, which arouses hope within us—something besides the memory
of deceit, the sense of having lost what the heroic contemporaries
of Richelieu and Colbert caught sight of, for their country. Our
American work is not to be summed up as a failure. It is the
Americans themselves who recognize this and who say it.”




VIII. IMPRESSIONS OF M. RENÉ BAZIN


In the _Revue des Deux Mondes_ for September, 1912, is published a
pleasant article by M. René Bazin, of the French Academy, entitled
“Paysages d’Amérique,” in which he gives a graphic and poetic account
of his American visit as a member of the French delegation, which
presented the statue of France for the Champlain memorial. He tells
of the voyage, paints vividly his first impressions of New York,
chats of his visit to Washington, with many fresh impressions of
scenes and people. His article, which is in journal form, brings him
to Lake Champlain, May 3, 1912. After noting various incidents of the
journey north, he continues:

  Since last evening we have traveled by special train to the banks
  of Lake Champlain. Early this morning, the sensation of being still
  awoke me. I opened the window of the Pullman and saw that we were
  stopped on a siding, in the open country. Day was breaking; the sun
  had not yet risen. Before me, at the right of the railroad, were
  low lands, grassy, wild, like neglected pastures. Further on, a
  great house under the elms, and further yet the waters of the lake,
  the gleam of which came to me in rays between the white mists which
  rolled up. The silence was perfect. It was the season, already past
  with us, when the blackbirds at day-break poise themselves on the
  top of the trees.

  Nothing was lacking. The outlines of the hills beyond the lake and
  above the mists, were of a vivid blue, and, suddenly, the globe
  of the sun showed itself. Presently a great heron, seeking the
  woods, came on wing, his legs like a rudder, and crossed over the
  bank. I hear the sound of the beats of his short wings; I hear
  the coming of a train on the distant horizon, and the noise is so
  sharp that it makes me realize the immensity of the land through
  which it spreads. Primitive peace is still here. I go out; I notice
  at the left of the line the successive level of wooded hills, the
  highest of which have the appearance of mountains. These are the
  Adirondacks. They call them “Green Mountains” in the country. But
  they look out upon the morning and the myriads of buds massed
  together clothe them in purple. Oaks, perhaps; probably maples;
  this beautiful maple which has two red seasons.

  About eight o’clock automobiles come for us. I get into the first,
  with Hanotaux and two others of our companions. We have not a
  long road to go. On one side, clear woodland; a short approach,
  a turning to the left, a fine descending curve planted with green
  trees, and we are before the steps of a great villa on the shores
  of the lake. Our hosts for the morning, Mr. and Mrs. S. H. P.
  Pell, came to us on the veranda. The automobiles stop and at once
  a little boom of cannon is heard ahead of us. We look in the
  direction whence the shot comes and we see the grass of the field
  all starred with tricolor flags. A second automobile arrives.
  It is saluted as were ourselves. In the fine house,—very well
  lighted, very white, ornamented with family portraits and with
  old engravings representing scenes of other days in this place
  so enriched in history, we are greeted with a graciousness and a
  knowledge of the world which is manifested through a considerate
  and sincere heart. There are some moments in which plain people
  and simple actions become arguments in favor of a country. I
  shall never again hear the American spirit ill-spoken of without
  recalling the hospitality of the Americans of Ticonderoga. The
  name is an Indian name of the fortress which was entrusted by
  Louis XV. to the Marquis de Montcalm. The French have said, say,
  and will say, “Carillon.” At Carillon, July 8, 1758, the Marquis
  de Montcalm had only 3,570 regulars, 87 marines, 85 Canadians, and
  16 Indians, under his command,—that is to say, 3,758 soldiers.
  But he was entrenched in the woods and he had a refuge in case of
  need. Abercromby commanded an army of 16,500 men and he came on to
  conquer this feeble enemy and to establish finally English dominion
  over Canada. The hour was not yet come. Once more, although the
  enemy was brave and determined, France with unequal arms was
  victorious.

  Entering Mr. Pell’s house, we were reminded of this date, these
  figures, and of their fine significance. We remembered that in this
  forest where we are, Montcalm in early morning, throwing off his
  jacket and crouching under the branches of a tree, said to his men
  who labored to gather the stones for the intrenchments, “Children,
  the day will be hot!” We recall that at evening in the same place,
  as the fading light of day was prolonged by the reflection of the
  lake, he wrote: “What a day for France! The little army of the King
  conquers his enemies. Ah, what troops like ours! I have never seen
  their equal!”

  In how many parts of the world, among others, cannot memory speak
  to us thus softly of the glory of our arms! But what is delicious
  here is that a foreign family which entertains us, also remembers,
  and that it understands, and that it recognizes something beyond
  the mere history.

  While they served us with a well-ordered breakfast—there were even
  fruits from California and Florida in aromatic wine—our hosts and
  the parents of our hosts spoke to us of that France that they know
  and love, of Cartier, of Roberval, of Champlain, “father of the
  aborigines,” of the missionaries, of Frontenac, of Vaudreuil and
  of Montcalm. These names lived again and those of their adversaries.

  We learned that Mr. Pell has sought to buy all the lands around
  Ticonderoga where the French and English fought, so that no one
  shall build a hotel there and lessen the sacred character of this
  landscape. Is it not a fine stroke, and does he belong by chance to
  this “material civilization,” of which they have made in respect
  to Americans so much reproach, so much hard compliment? We go out
  of the house; we cross the field, and, the ground falling away a
  little, we are in front of a square fortress of stone, protected
  by ditches. The proprietors have restored it, but the great part
  of these old stones are truly stones of war, and the black rafters
  of the chambers have become brown by the smoke of pipes which were
  lighted in the hard winter of this climate by the lost and almost
  abandoned children of the regiments of France.

  One thinks of the reproaches which they would have made to the
  news brought by the Indians, to the wind which howled, to the snow
  storm.... The fort is decorated in our honor. On its front, a
  bronze plaque bears this inscription: “Germain redoubt constructed
  by captain Germain, régiment des Gardes de la Reine, in 1758, by
  order of the marquis de Montcalm, in command of the fortress of
  Carillon.”

  The extent of the old covered way, cut through to-day, brings
  us to the interior of the earthworks. Before us, at 500 meters,
  high glacis crown the hill and conceal just at the roof line a
  construction which would have served as quarters for the officers.
  I notice two flags waving at the end of two great flagstaffs, and
  more below, like a basket of violets moving, for the wind is brisk,
  where they have been planted. But no one explains to me yet what
  we have come to see, and Mr. Pell, who walks with me, stooping,
  picks a woolly leaf of a wild plant, and says to me: “Keep it
  as souvenir. Right here, some years ago, we set out to make an
  excavation. At the first stroke of the pick the workmen uncovered
  some bodies clothed in trimmed uniforms. They were immediately
  ordered to cover them up and not to disturb them.” We were moved. I
  continued to ascend the hill. One has to turn a little to find the
  entrance into the fortress of Carillon. A dozen cannon outside are
  still pointed towards the lake and towards the little neighboring
  mountain, “The mount of France” which drew the English artillery.
  I enter the enclosure of the fortress. It is trimmed up. It awaits
  France. Ah, see who has come—_La France!_ and she sees in front of
  the wall of Montcalm’s old quarters, ten silken standards which
  the wind lifts and lets fall heavily on the staffs; violet squares
  bordered with white, blue panels barred with red, many-colored
  banners, all the standards of the regiments of France which were
  represented at the battle of Carillon. The victorious colors live
  again in the light, and a little above, dominating the broken
  walls and the roofs, two great flags protect the others, command
  them and explain them; the starry flag of young America and the
  banner of ancient France, all white and strewn with Fleur-de-lis.
  My eyes fill with tears, and I really think that two tears have
  fallen. I am sure that they said, “Long live this American who has
  a deep heart.” They say still other things and I feel myself living
  wholly in the France of other days.

  The house of the fort has become a museum; swords, guns,
  ammunition, letters, keys, spades which were broken in throwing
  up the entrenchments, engravings of several periods, are there
  hung on the walls or arranged in showcases; even an old watch,
  which the journal of the fortress, likewise preserved, states, had
  been lost among the ruins. We linger there and I notice that our
  traveling companions speak less as time passes. But when we have
  made the round of the walls of Carillon and when we notice in the
  full light of ten o’clock in the morning all the country which
  the old fort commands, words come again; joy, also; the ground
  descends from there down to the lake, narrow at this point; the
  hills rise gradually and the blue of the distance defines itself
  in clear lines upon the pale azure of the horizon. Some one says:
  “Do you not notice how that resembles the plain of Pau, as seen
  from the terrace?” Indeed, if I efface from my memory the image
  of blue waters, which the waters of Lake Champlain disturbed by
  the melting snows do not at all resemble, and which do not reflect
  the sky, the two landscapes have a similarity. Even the atmosphere
  is transparent here, revealing the elevated conformation of the
  distance. Another of our companions, who soon notices the extended
  form of the lake and the color of the trees on the lower level,
  says, almost at the same moment, “I believe I see the Vosges with
  Retournemer and Longemer.” In other ways we recognize here French
  harmonies.

  Some hours later, we are on a point of land quite far from the fort
  of Carillon, at the foot of a white stone lighthouse. The light
  overlooks a stretch of bad rock land, standing in the midst of low
  places and fields which stretch out behind it. What a desert this
  would be, and from the origin of the world, this spur on which
  break the short waves of Lake Champlain!

  But to-day the people of the American towns, those who live in
  the Adirondacks, those from the other side of the water, miners,
  farmers, and various workers, or trout fishers, who have come to
  prepare for the coming season, have assembled at Crown Point Forts.
  Some horses, picketed, browse in the fields; others are hitched
  to the branches of a hawthorne—the remains, perhaps of an old
  plantation, set out by the hand of a jealous old French soldier.
  Some American carriages, a little seat on four very light wheels;
  some wagons, twenty automobiles, are scattered on the grass, while
  around the lighthouse, on all the levels of the rock, are seated
  upon benches or on the ground a mixed population, intimate,
  badly controlling the children who race around like young quail;
  listening, understanding—or pretending to understand—the speeches
  which glorify Champlain. The bronze medallion which represents
  France, the work of Rodin, brought by us, is already set in its
  niche in front. The wind blows; it causes to vibrate the ten cords
  stretched from the lantern of the lighthouse to the ground in a
  crown, and flaps the big canopy and all the flags which ornament
  it. And as my mind wanders when the speeches are in English, I
  listen to what the flags are saying:

  “Do you see them, these people seated in the front row? They don’t
  belong here.”

  “It’s plain that they don’t belong here. You’re not saying much of
  anything: Are they tanned by the open air? Have they the free and
  easy way of the American citizen?”

  “I suppose that they are from Paris?”

  “You have a very simple way of being sure of it, my dear. Did you
  ever hear such a noise! Listen! When they are from Paris, there is
  never any lack of talk!”

  “—Precisely, the orator proclaims himself; he comes from Paris.”

  “Not of great extent, this France?”

  “Not very formidable?”

  One flag, smoke-blackened, said:

  “Not very serious?”

  Then, the English flag, which had said nothing, snapped a blow so
  sharp that a whip wouldn’t have been better.

  “Very serious, my dear. I’ve known the French. I’ve known the
  French at a time when you were not such a much, be it said without
  offense to you. I have known Champlain. He had a jovial way. He was
  usually pleasant. The Indians said of him: ‘We like to hear you
  speak. You always have something pleasant to say.’ But, believe me,
  I understood him: it was as a colonial and a rough adversary, I
  say adversary, because that is the name that one gives to his old
  enemies when they have become his friends, you understand?”

  “Pretty well.”

  I leave the flags, ruffling. I think of this brave man, whose fête
  this is, at this moment, in his little sleepy and grass-grown
  town of Brouage: of the dreams of glory that were his, all
  youthful, like those of a good many men of his time, and which he
  accomplished because he had a heart capable of suffering for his
  love. For he loved France. He left her, the better to serve her.
  He bore with him, to the West Indies, and afterwards to Canada,
  a poor companion, a perfect and holy image. Almost alone among
  the savages, having carried upon his strong shoulders, oars,
  provisions and the blanket for his bed at night, enured to heat,
  to cold, to mosquitoes, to long exiles and the perpetual treason
  of men, over these identical grounds where we now are, he made his
  way to discovery, beholding a new world reveal itself about him,
  and giving it to his Lord in heaven, as he gave it to his King,
  secretly, hourly, by each glance with which he took possession
  of this unknown world. For he says: “Kings should not think of
  extending their domination in infidel lands, except to establish
  there the reign of Christ.” Commerce was not forgotten. But what
  superior humanity! It is still living, only disregarded. Champlain
  has passed here. I realize that this landscape has been reflected
  in his eyes as it is in mine. This landscape? Is it indeed sure?
  Where are the trusty witnesses? Not the meadow, which is new.
  Not the trees, too young for him to have known, nor the waters,
  which have changed, nor the clouds, nor even the ancestors of the
  spectators assembled on this strand. We can scarcely say that the
  movement of the sun sang as to-day, the same verse in the hymn
  universal.

M. Bazin concludes with a running account of his continued journey
to Montreal and Quebec, recalling at length their wealth of historic
associations.




IX. COMMENT IN APPRECIATION OF THE VISIT OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION AND
HONORS CONFERRED


The mission of the French delegation proved to be of far deeper
import, than the mere presentation of the Rodin bust, gratifying
to Americans as was that superb gift on the part of its donors. It
awakened in the people of this country, quite as much as it did in
the members of that delegation, renewed interest in the activities
and achievements of the peoples of the two Republics, which are
the foremost democracies of the world. M. Hanotaux, a scholar, a
statesman and a diplomat and his distinguished colleagues, are
among the foremost citizens of France. They represented the several
departments of the Government as well as the various trades and
professions in the civil life of that Republic. Commerce and
industries were represented by M. Antoine Girard, Counsellor of
Foreign Commerce. Their reputation had long been established
in science, in literature and in the fine arts and also in
jurisprudence, in statesmanship and in diplomacy, as exemplified
in the genial and charming personality of Ambassador Jusserand.
They are among the present day celebrities of the French nation and
were invited to become members of the Embassy on account of their
individual standing in the official, social and intellectual life of
that Republic.

One cannot read their addresses and their reports to Paris of the
impressions, which they formed on their visit to America, without
appreciating the spontaneity of their tributes to the American people
and to their institutions, the warmth of their expressions of good
will and generous impulses towards the people of this nation and
their gratitude for the deep interest shown by the people of the
United States, and especially by those of Vermont and New York, in
commemorating the achievements and the character of one of their
countrymen.

The unreported addresses of Baron D’Estournelle de Constant, member
of the French Senate and the representative of France at the Hague
International Peace Tribunal, and of M. Louis Barthou, ex-Minister
of Justice and one of the leading Parliamentarians of the Chamber
of Deputies, will long be remembered for their urbanity, for the
breadth of their views, and for the brilliancy of their eloquent
periods. The addresses of M. Hanotaux and others and the foregoing
reports of Gaston Deschamps, of M. de la Blache, the geographer of
the University of Paris, and of René Bazin, of the French Academy,
disclose the character and beauty of the style of the French
littérateurs. Wherever the members of the delegation went, they were
gratefully welcomed and entertained in stately manner. The social
functions taxed the powers of endurance on the part of the visitors
to their full extent. They made hosts of friends and gave Americans
opportunity to meet them and to become acquainted with gentlemen and
ladies possessed of the rare culture and refinement of French life.
Their visit was timely and did much to strengthen the ties that
bind the peoples of the two Republics in friendly accord. They made
an impression on the people of this country that will be quite as
enduring as the bronze testimonial of the good will of the people of
France towards those of the United States, firmly set in the granite
base of the Champlain Memorial at Crown Point Forts and there was
voiced by the friends, whom they made in America, the sentiment,
_Vive la France_.

Some months after the return of the French delegation to France,
Commissioner Walter C. Witherbee was appointed by the President
of the French Republic a Knight of the Legion of Honor, which was
formally and appreciatively acknowledged by this Commission.

Knighthood in the Legion of Honor was also conferred by the President
of France upon Hon. Frank S. Witherbee, a member of Preliminary
Champlain Commission and President of the Lake Champlain Association,
which participated in the entertainment of the French delegation at
the Waldorf-Astoria banquet on May 1, 1912.

Hon. A. Barton Hepburn, President of the Chamber of Commerce of
the State of New York, which entertained the French delegation at
luncheon on May 2, 1912, has recently been decorated by the President
of France with the honorary rank of Officer in the Legion of Honor.

The French Government has recently presented to Honorable Charles
B. Alexander, member of the Society of the Cincinnati, who gave
a reception on April 30, 1912, to the French delegation in his
beautiful home at No. 4 West 58th Street, New York City, the artistic
Sèvres bisque group of national manufacture, known as “Télémaque chez
Calypso,” by the sculptor, M. Louis Simon Boizot.

Knighthood in the Legion of Honor was also conferred by the President
of the Republic of France upon President John H. Finley of the
College of the City of New York, who has taken deep interest in the
life of Samuel Champlain and in French colonization in America. His
felicitous remarks at the Waldorf-Astoria banquet on May 1, 1912,
were genuinely appreciated by Ambassador Jusserand, the members of
the French delegation, and all others in attendance. President Finley
was the Harvard Exchange lecturer under the Hyde Foundation in 1910
at the University of Paris and at ten other French universities.

In February, 1913, His Excellency, Raymond Poincaré, President of the
Republic of France, appointed Henry W. Hill, Secretary of the New
York Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission, a Knight of the Legion
of Honor, in recognition of his public, literary and other services
in connection with the Tercentenary Celebration from its inception in
1907 to the conclusion of the Final Report of the Commission in 1913.

These delicate and touching expressions of appreciation on the part
of President Fallières, President Poincaré, Ambassador Jusserand and
the citizens of France of the courtesies shown to the members of the
French delegation, while in the United States, are still further
evidences of the warmth of the kindly feelings existing between the
people of that Republic and those of this nation, and are gratefully
appreciated.




Part Two

DEDICATORY CEREMONIES




I. PREPARATION FOR DEDICATORY CEREMONIES, INCLUDING MILITARY FEATURES


The Commission decided to have the dedicatory ceremonies of the
Crown Point memorial on July 5, 1912, and of the Plattsburgh
memorial on July 6, 1912, the anniversary week of the Tercentenary
Celebration. Formal invitations to the dedicatory ceremonies of
the Crown Point memorial were sent by the New York and Vermont
Lake Champlain Commissions, and to the dedicatory exercises of the
Plattsburgh memorial, by the New York Commission, to the President
and Vice-President of the United States, to the United States
Senators of New York and Vermont, to the members of Congress from the
Champlain valley, to the French Ambassador, His Excellency, J. J.
Jusserand, the British Ambassador, the Right Honorable James Bryce
and to Count and Countess de Peretti de la Rocca and to M. Maugras,
members of the French Embassy and to members of the British Embassy
at Washington, to the Governors, Lieutenant-Governors and other
officials of New York and Vermont, including Hon. William Sohmer,
State Comptroller, Hon. Andrew S. Draper, State Commissioner of
Education, Hon. Henry W. Hoefer, State Architect, Major-General John
F. O’Ryan, Adjutant-General William Verbeck and Hon. James A. Holden,
State Historian, Hon. John A. Bensel, State Engineer and Surveyor,
to prominent members of the State Legislature, to Justice Charles
E. Hughes, former Governor of New York, to Hon. George H. Prouty,
former Governor of Vermont, to Col. Calvin D. Cowles, to Hon. Frank
S. Witherbee, President of the Champlain Association, to Percival
Wilds, Secretary of that Association, to Mr. Stephen H. P. Pell, to
Hon. James A. Roberts, President of the New York State Historical
Association, to Frederick B. Richards, Secretary of the New York
State Historical Association, to Dr. George F. Kunz, President of the
American Scenic and Historic Preservation Society, to Hon. Charles B.
Alexander, to Hon. McDougall Hawkes, to Carl A. Heber, the sculptor,
to Paul Faguet of the French Line, to Hon. William Cary Sanger,
to Hon. Francis Lynde Stetson, Hon. Robert Roberts, to Hon. Job E.
Hedges, to President Guy Potter Benton, LL. D., of the University of
Vermont, to President John M. Thomas, D. D., of Middlebury College,
to President Charles H. Spooner, Ph. D., of Norwich University, and
to others, in addition to the invitations sent to members of the New
York and Vermont Tercentenary Commissions, and to some prominent
citizens of Vermont.

The special invitations included in most instances the ladies of the
gentlemen so invited and they were present at all the exercises.

The Board of Governors of the Lake Champlain Association through
its Secretary, Percival Wilds, sent to its members notice they were
invited to the dedicatory exercises and to accompany the guests on
the steamer “_Ticonderoga_” through the lake.

President Frank S. Witherbee and many members of the Association
were present at the dedicatory ceremonies of the Crown Point and the
Plattsburgh memorials. The officers and members of the Lake Champlain
Association took a deep interest in the Tercentenary celebration
and from time to time rendered assistance to the Tercentenary
Commissioners in various ways, and especially so in assuming the
responsibility and conduct of the banquet to the French delegation at
the Waldorf-Astoria in New York City on May 1, 1912.

In arranging for the dedicatory exercises, no effort was made to
augment the attendance, nor to rival in elaboration the programme of
the Tercentenary celebration of 1909.

All that remained on this occasion for the Lake Champlain
Tercentenary Commissioners to do was to turn over formally to the
properly constituted authorities the Champlain memorials, which
had been constructed pursuant to law at Crown Point Forts and at
Plattsburgh. The exercises, therefore, were planned with that end
in view. They were dignified and stately, but did not extend beyond
the formal presentation and acceptances of the memorials as will
appear from the record that follows. The President, Vice-President,
United States Senators, Foreign Ambassadors and some other specially
invited guests were unable to attend on account of the prolonged
second session of the Sixty-second Congress, or absence from the
country, at the time of the dedicatory ceremonies, to the regret
of the members of the Commissions and the people of the Champlain
valley. The participation of these officials of the United States,
France and Great Britain in the Tercentenary exercises had added
national as well as international stateliness to that commemorative
celebration, still fresh in the memory of all who chanced to
witness it. The unavoidable absence of these distinguished guests
was in a measure compensated for, however, in the presence of
their representatives, who contributed much to the success of
the dedicatory ceremonies. All arrangements were carried forward
for the dedication of the Crown Point memorial by Commissioners
Witherbee, Knapp, Pell, Lafontaine and Shea with all the forethought
and care that had characterized their painstaking efforts from
the first. Commissioner Hill, and President John M. Thomas of the
Vermont Commission planned the programme and secured the speakers.
Commissioners Booth, Riley, Weaver and Knapp were no less vigilant in
preparing for the dedicatory ceremonies of the Plattsburgh Champlain
Memorial. In this they were materially assisted by the mayor of the
city, the Chamber of Commerce and the people of Plattsburgh as well
as by Colonel Calvin D. Cowles of the Fifth U. S. Infantry, stationed
at Plattsburgh Barracks. The people of Plattsburgh purchased and
improved the site for the Champlain memorial, decorated the streets
for the dedicatory exercises, provided automobiles for the visitors
to make a tour of the city and aided the Tercentenary Commissioners
in other ways in carrying to a successful conclusion the dedicatory
ceremonies.

The attendance at both the Crown Point and the Plattsburgh exercises
was thoroughly representative of the people of the Champlain valley,
though not as large as at the Tercentenary exercises. The steamer
“_Ticonderoga_” was chartered by the New York Tercentenary Commission
and brought the invited guests from Plattsburgh, Burlington and Port
Henry. After the exercises at Crown Point Forts, the “_Ticonderoga_”
took the guests back to their several destinations and the members
of the Tercentenary Commissions to Bluff Point, where they registered
at the new Hotel Champlain.

The military features of the dedicatory ceremonies are given in the
following report of the Military Committee:


The military features of the ceremonies attending the dedication of
the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point, N. Y., July 5,
1912, and the unveiling of the Statue of Champlain at Plattsburgh,
N. Y., July 6, 1912, were on a much smaller scale than those of the
celebration of 1909, but the presence of the United States and State
troops added greatly to the dignity of the ceremonies at both places.
When the chartered steamboat “_Ticonderoga_” left the dock at Port
Henry at 11:30 A. M., July 5th, Governor John A. Dix and the
following members of his staff were on board:

  Brigadier-General William Verbeck, The Adjutant-General, S. N. Y.

  Lieutenant-Commander Eckford Craven de Kay, Military Secretary to
  the Governor.

  Commander Russell Raynor, First Battalion, N. M.

  Commander Edward H. Snyder, 47th Infantry, N. G., N. Y.

  Captain Walter S. Gibson, 74th Infantry, N. G., N. Y.

  Captain Charles Curie, First Cavalry, N. G., N. Y.

  First Lieutenant Griswold Green, Aide, Third Brigade, N. G., N. Y.

  First Lieutenant Harry S. Underwood, Aide, Third Brigade, N. G., N. Y.

Major-General John F. O’Ryan, N. G., N. Y., came up on the special
car from New York and was the guest of the Commission until evening,
when he was obliged to return to review the Sixty-ninth Regiment, N.
G., N. Y.

Governor John A. Mead of Vermont was unable to be present but was
represented by:

  Lee S. Tillotson, The Adjutant-General, representing the Governor.

  Colonel D. L. Morgan, Aide-de-Camp.

  Major H. R. Kingsley, Military Secretary.

  First Lieutenant John B. Barnes, U. S. Infantry,
  Inspector-Instructor, Organized Militia of Vermont.

[Illustration: Landing Troops and Guests at Crown Point Forts, July
5, 1912]

[Illustration: Col. Sanger, Gov. Dix and Others landing at Crown
Point Memorial, July 5, 1912]

Company “M,” 1st Infantry, N. G., Vt., Captain J. M. Ashley
commanding, and forty enlisted men came down from Burlington on the
steamboat.

The 9th Separate Company of Whitehall, or Company “I,” 2d Infantry,
N. G., N. Y., went into camp at the Lake House, Crown Point Village,
on July 4th, and proceeded on a ferryboat early in the morning of the
5th to the Crown Point Forts. Captain R. G. Hays was in command with
First Lieutenant J. J. Kelly, Second Lieutenant Dewey A. Forbush, and
fifty enlisted men.


CROWN POINT FORTS

On the arrival of the “_Ticonderoga_” at the wharf at the Champlain
Memorial Lighthouse, Crown Point, N. Y., Captain Hays’ Company was
drawn up in line to receive the guests. Captain Ashley’s Company
marched off the boat preceded by the Port Henry Band. Governor Dix,
the Tercentennial Commissioners and the invited guests followed and
the line of march was formed under escort of the two companies.
Company “I” being on the right. The column then proceeded to the
English forts, where the bronze memorial tablet presented to the
State by the Society of Colonial Wars in the State of New York was
unveiled by Miss Evelyn Witherbee. The two companies were drawn up to
the right and left of the tablet which was guarded by a sergeant from
Company “I.” At the conclusion of the brief ceremonies, the column
returned to the wharf, where the invited guests boarded the steamboat
for luncheon while the troops bivouacked on the shore. At 1:30 P.
M. the companies were drawn up in line near the Lighthouse,
Company “I” being on the New York side of the Government Reservation,
and Company “M” on the side toward Vermont. At the conclusion of the
ceremonies Company “I” returned to their camp, on the ferryboat, and
Company “M” boarded the “_Ticonderoga_” to be landed at Burlington.


PLATTSBURGH

At 10 A. M., July 6th, Governor Dix, the Tercentenary Commissioners
and the invited guests were present at a review of the Fifth
Infantry, U. S. A., at Plattsburgh Barracks, ordered in their honor
by Colonel Calvin D. Cowles, Commanding Officer of the Post. As
Governor Dix approached the reviewing stand, the regulation salute
of seventeen guns was fired. At 1:30 P. M. the regiment escorted
the party from the hotel through the streets of Plattsburgh to the
new Champlain Park, where line was formed and the proper salutes
given. At the conclusion of the ceremonies of the unveiling of the
Champlain Monument, the regiment returned to its quarters. The names
of the officers and number of enlisted men, including the band,
participating in the ceremonies are as follows:

  Colonel Calvin D. Cowles, Fifth Infantry; Major William F. Martin,
  Fifth Infantry; Major Armand I. Lasseigne, Fifth Infantry;
  Major Peter C. Harris, Fifth Infantry; Chaplain Horace A.
  Chouinard, Fifth Infantry; Captain Edward Sigerfoos, Adjutant,
  Fifth Infantry; Captain William D. Davis, Quarter-Master, Fifth
  Infantry; Captain Girard Sturtevant, Fifth Infantry; Captain
  Robert Field, Commissary, Fifth Infantry; Captain Robert E. Frith,
  Fifth Infantry; Captain Clement A. Trott, Fifth Infantry; Captain
  Ralph McCoy, Fifth Infantry; Captain Howard C. Price, Fifth
  Infantry; First Lieutenant Leonard J. Mygatt, Fifth Infantry;
  First Lieutenant Auswell E. Deitsch, Fifth Infantry; First
  Lieutenant Sydney H. Hopson, Fifth Infantry; First Lieutenant
  Will D. Wills, Fifth Infantry; First Lieutenant Daniel A. Nolan,
  Battalion Adjutant, Fifth Infantry; First Lieutenant James E.
  McDonald, Fifth Infantry; First Lieutenant Deshler Whiting, Fifth
  Infantry; First Lieutenant Walton Goodwin, Jr., Fifth Infantry;
  First Lieutenant Thomas L. Crystal, Battalion Adjutant, Fifth
  Infantry; Second Lieutenant Charles F. White, Fifth Infantry;
  Second Lieutenant Alfred H. Erck, Fifth Infantry; Second Lieutenant
  Oliver A. Dickinson, Fifth Infantry; Second Lieutenant John M.
  McDowell, Fifth Infantry; Second Lieutenant Thompson Lawrence,
  Fifth Infantry; Second Lieutenant Sumner Waite, Fifth Infantry—714
  enlisted men.

                                                HOWLAND PELL,
                                                         _Chairman_.




II. UNVEILING TABLET AT THE ENGLISH FORT.


Upon reaching Crown Point Forts, a tablet was unveiled on the walls
of the old Barracks at the English fort, built by General Amherst
and occasionally called “Fort Amherst,” by members of the Society of
Colonial Wars, which was witnessed by the Champlain Commissioners and
the large assemblage of people. The following report of the Tablet
Committee is of historical interest:


REPORT OF THE TABLET COMMITTEE

To the members of the Society of Colonial Wars, in the State of New
York, your committee beg to report that the tablet has been designed,
cast and erected on the walls of the old Barracks at Fort Amherst in
the State Reservation at Crown Point, New York.

The design was drawn and the details of modeling were carried out
under the supervision of Mr. Walter B. Chambers, of the committee.
The sculptor who made the Tablet was Mr. Herman Wurth.

The tablet was unveiled with appropriate ceremony on Friday, July 5,
1912, on the occasion of the dedication of the Champlain Memorial
Lighthouse, erected by the states of New York and Vermont, at Crown
Point, N. Y.

The members of the Society were guests of the Tercentenary
Commissions on the steamboat “_Ticonderoga_,” leaving Port Henry, New
York. At 11:30 A. M. on the day mentioned, and on landing at Crown
Point, a procession was formed and led by the Port Henry Band, and an
escort of Company “I,” 2d Regiment, N. G., N. Y., and Company “M,”
N. G., Vt., Governor Dix and staff, Adjutant-General Tillotson and
staff, representing Governor John A. Mead, of Vermont.

Major-General John F. O’Ryan, N. G., N. Y., Count and Countess
de Peretti de la Rocca, and Mr. Maugras, representing the French
Embassy.

Members of the New York and Vermont Champlain Tercentenary
Commission, Colonel William Cary Sanger, Governor of our Society,
Frederick B. Richards, Dr. Reynolds Webb Wilcox, George G. Reynolds,
Stephen H. P. Pell, and other members of the Society, and about one
hundred invited guests marched from the wharf to the English Fort
built under Amherst, where the tablet was handsomely decorated with
American flags guarded by a soldier of the 2d Regiment.

Hon. Howland Pell, your chairman, called the meeting to order, and
stated that the committee had finished its task, and asked Miss
Evelyn Witherbee to unveil the tablet. As this was done the band
played the National air, the troops came to attention, and the
audience of several thousand applauded. Its inscription showed
that the tablet was erected by the Society of Colonial Wars in
commemoration of the erection of the Fortress by Amherst and capture
of Fort St. Frédéric.

[Illustration: Unveiling Tablet at Fort Amherst, July 5, 1912]

The chairman then introduced Col. William Cary Sanger, who in a few
well chosen words presented the tablet to the State of New York.
Governor Dix then made a brief address, accepting the Tablet and
placed it in the custody of the New York Historical Association in
charge of the Reservation. Mr. James A. Holden, Treasurer, and Mr.
Frederick B. Richards, Secretary, of the Association, accepted the
charge and made short addresses. Judge Pyrke, of Port Henry, chairman
of the local committee, promised to see that the tablet would be well
cared for. The tablet bears the following inscription:

          1759                                        1912.

  THIS TABLET IS ERECTED BY THE SOCIETY OF COLONIAL WARS IN THE STATE
  OF NEW-YORK A. D. 1912 TO COMMEMORATE THE CAPTURE OF FORT ST.
  FRÉDÉRIC AND THE ERECTION OF THIS FORTRESS A. D. 1759 BY THE BRITISH
  AND PROVINCIAL ARMY COMMANDED BY GENERAL SIR JEFFREY AMHERST


BRITISH REGIMENTS

  1st or the Royal Regiment of Foot
  17th Regiment of Foot “Forbé’s”
  27th (Inniskilling) Regiment of Foot
  42d Royal Highlanders—Black Watch
  55th Regiment of Foot, “Prideaux’s”
  77th Regiment Montgomery’s Highlanders
  80th (Light Armed)—Regiment of
  Foot “Gage’s”
  Royal Artillery
  Detachment of Sailors

PROVINCIAL REGIMENTS

  Col. Lyman’s—Connecticut
  Col. Whiting’s—Connecticut
  Col. Worcester’s—Connecticut
  Col. Fitch’s—Connecticut
  Col. Willard’s—Massachusetts
  Col. Ruggle’s—Massachusetts
  Col. Lovell’s—New Hampshire
  Col. Schuyler’s—New Jersey
  Col. Babcock’s—Rhode Island Rangers and Indians.

The tablet is of the finest bronze, 30 by 24 inches in size, and
represents a soldier of the Black Watch, and a provincial soldier
holding a scroll of inscription. General Sir Jeffrey Amherst’s head
is in the upper center, and the insignia of the Society in the lower,
the background shows the English forts, and a list of the English and
American regiments in the campaign is given.

                                                HOWLAND PELL,
                                                        _Chairman_.


ADDRESS OF ACCEPTANCE OF TABLET BY JAMES AUSTIN HOLDEN, STATE
HISTORIAN AND TREASURER, NEW YORK STATE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION

  The tablet was formally accepted for the New York State Historical
  Association by State Historian James A. Holden of Glens Falls, who
  is ex-officio a member of the committee in charge of the Crown
  Point Reservation, as well as Treasurer of the New York State
  Historical Association. He spoke briefly as follows:

  _Your Excellency_, _Tercentenary Commissioners_, _Representatives
  of New York and of Vermont_, _of France_, _of Patriotic and
  Historical Societies_, _Ladies and Gentlemen_: It is with great
  pleasure that I accept on behalf of the New York Historical
  Association, the official custodians of the Crown Point
  Reservation, this beautiful and distinctive tablet which has just
  been presented by the Society of Colonial Wars to the State of New
  York, through you, its Governor.

  It is especially gratifying to the Association to receive it
  from your hands, for it is to you, and your broad and patriotic
  conception of the duties of the chief executive of the State,
  that our hearty thanks are due for the generous and welcome local
  appropriations which you lately have approved, making so largely
  for the preservation, the maintenance and popularity of the
  reservation.

  On this torrid July day whose sun’s rays reflected from these
  crumbling walls are full as deadly as any of the bullets which
  blazed forth at them in days of old, my words of acceptance must be
  brief indeed.

  This expressive addition, then, to these historic walls, whose
  story is rife with actions of emprise and derring-do, around which
  still hover the historic spirits of the olden wars, connected with
  which are the inspiring deeds of the knightly souls of Montcalm and
  Amherst, of Warner and Burgoyne, yes, even of Arnold the patriot,
  not yet the traitor, full of the memories of the now shadowy hosts
  of white coated Bourbons, the red attired British, and the buff and
  blue covered Revolutionists, we accept and assure your Excellency
  that it shall be our earnest endeavor to prove worthy in every way
  of the confidence reposed in us in making this Association the
  State’s representative for this reservation.

  On behalf of the Association I now turn over to the Secretary of
  the Association the formal care of the tablet, thanking once more
  your Excellency and all who have been concerned in the presentation
  of this memorial, for giving to the Association this further
  opportunity to prove its historical usefulness, and to justify its
  being, and for providing this occasion to exemplify practically the
  purposes for which it was founded.

[Illustration: Tablet Unveiled at Fort Amherst, July 5, 1912]

Frederick B. Richards, Secretary of the New York State Historical
Association, at the unveiling of the tablet at Crown Point Forts, N.
Y., July 5, 1912, said:

  I supplement State Historian Holden because I feel that it will
  take at least two to make up for the absence of our esteemed
  President, Ex-Comptroller Roberts, who was to have represented the
  New York State Historical Association this morning.

  We feel deeply honored that the State has designated our
  Association as custodians of this reservation. We are still further
  honored by being entrusted with this beautiful tablet, erected by
  the Society of Colonial Wars, which, linking as it does the past
  with the present, adds to the interest of these old ruins.

  I will not detain you longer this morning except to call your
  attention to one feature of the tablet in which I am particularly
  interested. You will notice that the list of the regiments is
  supported on the left by a Highlander, a private of the Royal
  Highlanders as they were known in this campaign, otherwise called
  the 42d, “Old Forty-Twa,” or the Black Watch.

  The Black Watch, the oldest Highland regiment in the British Army
  and one of the regiments under Amherst who helped to build this
  old fort, was selected for this place of honor because of its
  unparalleled gallantry in the assault on Fort Ticonderoga under
  General Abercromby the year before, in which engagement it lost
  646, killed and wounded, out of a total strength of a thousand men
  who went into action, or a mortality of twice that of the Light
  Brigade at Balaklava, immortalized by Tennyson.

[Illustration: Col. Sanger, Gov. Dix and Staff approaching Memorial
at Crown Point, July 5, 1912]




III. DEDICATORY CEREMONIES OF CHAMPLAIN MEMORIAL LIGHTHOUSE AT CROWN
POINT FORTS JULY 5, 1912


At the appointed hour for the dedicatory ceremonies at Crown Point
Forts on July 5, 1912, a large multitude had assembled from the
Champlain valley and from the two states to witness the exercises.

Seated on the temporary platform in front of the Champlain Memorial
Lighthouse were: Colonel William Cary Sanger, representing the
President of the United States, Count de Peretti de la Rocca,
representing the French Ambassador, Governor John A. Dix of New
York, Adjutant-General Lee S. Tillotson, representing the Governor
of Vermont, and Commissioners H. Wallace Knapp, Chairman; Henry W.
Hill, Secretary; Walter C. Witherbee, Treasurer; Senator James A.
Foley, Judge John B. Riley, Judge John H. Booth, James Shea, Louis
C. Lafontaine, Howland Pell and William R. Weaver of the New York
Tercentenary Commission; and Lynn M. Hays, Secretary; Judge Frank
L. Fish, Treasurer; President John M. Thomas, Walter H. Crockett,
George T. Jarvis, William J. Van Patten, Arthur F. Stone and F. O.
Beaupre of the Vermont Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission, and
the speakers, invited guests and others.

The memorial as already stated was not complete in that the bronze
statuary group was represented by the models, as the bronze work had
not been put in position. That did not detract, however, from the
artistic features of the memorial, which were much admired by the
assembled multitude. The platform and memorial were artistically
decorated with the flags of the United States.

The programme at the dedicatory ceremonies was the following:

Hon. H. Wallace Knapp, Chairman of the New York Lake Champlain
Tercentenary Commission, presided:

The exercises were opened with appropriate music by the Sherman
Military Band of Burlington, Vermont. The following Invocation was
then pronounced by Rev. Lewis Francis, D.D., of New York City.

  Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, we invoke Thy blessing as we
  are gathered here to dedicate a monument which has been erected in
  commemoration of the discoveries and achievements of one whose name
  is borne by the beautiful lake on whose shores we are assembled.

  We thank Thee for his heroism and his faith, for his loyalty to
  his beloved country and his devotion to God. We thank Thee for his
  desire not only to plant the standard of France upon the land which
  he had discovered, but also to uplift the cross upon it. We thank
  Thee for the friendship which has existed for many years between
  the two countries which are represented here to-day. May this
  monument, erected by our country in memory of one of the heroes of
  France, be a fresh token of this friendship.

  Let Thy blessing rest upon the two States which have united in
  making this dedication possible. May this monument by its stability
  remind us of those strong and enduring qualities of character which
  should mark us as nations and individuals. May the light which
  shall shine forth from its summit be a symbol of the light of
  knowledge and of truth which as States and Nations we should seek
  to give the world, which may be both a guide and a warning; and may
  it bring Him to our thought, who is the Light of the world, that
  walking in His Light we may be guided aright through every peril of
  our lives.

  May the blessing of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
  Ghost rest upon the States and Nations here represented, and upon
  all of us who have assembled here to celebrate this glad event.

  And this we ask in the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

[Illustration: Champlain Memorial Lighthouse, July 5, 1912]

Then followed the formal unveiling of the Champlain Memorial
Lighthouse by Miss Louise G. Witherbee, daughter of Commissioner
Walter C. Witherbee, as the patriotic strains of the Star Spangled
Banner were being played by the Port Henry Band. As the memorial was
exposed to full view, its symmetry and beauty provoked the applause
of the admiring spectators, who thus saw the fulfillment of their
long cherished hopes, that there be erected in the Valley a stately
memorial to Samuel Champlain. Chairman Knapp, in speaking for the New
York Tercentenary Commission, thereupon formally presented the
memorial to the Governor of New York. In doing so he spoke as follows:

  In obedience to the authorization of the Federal Government, the
  Commissions of the States of Vermont and New York have erected on
  the lands of the United States of America, adjacent to the Crown
  Point Reservation, the specified memorial of the discovery of the
  Champlain valley, and are now acting in the discharge of their
  final duties, with the sincere feeling of gratification that a task
  so honorable has been brought to so happy an ending.

  Our duty has been to do, rather than to speak, and yet it may not
  be wholly out of place to give expression to the general thought,
  that the light of peace and safety, that is to glow from this
  monument through an unreckoned future, replaces the fitful fire of
  early war.

  The shores that the discoverer scanned with painful daring are no
  longer dark and solitary. He is no longer alone. The temptation to
  review the events of his arrival here are strong, but time forbids,
  and to do so in detail must be left to the official record. Nor
  need we in the discharge of our official functions attempt to
  portray the full significance of the deed we now commemorate. We
  must wait till the voice of history speaks, with the judgment of
  warriors and statesmen, with the inspiration of poetry and the
  reverence of enlightened piety.

  There seem to be moments in the life of every man, when he pauses
  in his career to recall the past and seeks to peer into the future,
  and so it is appointed for us to do to-day. While the daily rush of
  the outer world passes us by unheedingly in appearance, it is yet
  not truly so. From the day of the first visit of the white man, the
  eyes of the enlightened world have been upon the Champlain valley
  and the attentive good will of all well-wishers of their kind who
  are with us now.

  It can hardly be said that the present occasion marks the ending
  of an old epoch or the beginning of a new one. Peace has reigned
  within our borders for a hundred years. It marks rather the
  recognition of a century of peace as a harbinger of still more
  harmonious conditions for all times between the peoples whose
  fathers struggled here for mastery. It marks the welcoming of
  a new order of things in which the old problems have met their
  just solution and in which the ancient grudge is lost in charity.
  Standing here beside this monument to the past, and beacon of the
  future, we know that:

      God fulfills Himself in many ways,

  The old order changeth indeed when Vermont and New York live only
  in service to the common good and together place above their
  monument the emblem of their common country. It has long been so,
  but it was not always so. It is well, perhaps, to remember the
  passing altercations, since they serve now only to demonstrate how
  closely and firmly they have drawn together. Surely this water will
  run clear and sweet between them and the light from the tower above
  all fall upon fraternal shores. Vermont has done her duty, and her
  duty has been a labor of love. With such a spirit sitting by our
  hearthstone, the future of the valley is secure.

  In behalf of the Tercentenary Commission of the State of New York,
  I thank the members of the Tercentenary Commission of the State
  of Vermont and all their associates, for the efficiency of their
  co-operation in the labors that are now drawing to a close.

  Gentlemen of the Executive Departments of the States of Vermont
  and New York, our task is done; the monument before us is at your
  disposal. In the name of the New York Commission I want to thank
  you and your predecessors in office for the aid you have given us,
  and the effective support we have received from you, in the days of
  our perplexity and discouragement. If any shortcomings of ours are
  to be remembered, kindly bear in mind that it was our heads and not
  our hearts that went astray.

  That these meetings of officials and citizens of the countries that
  are represented here will be repeated, and that the spirit of peace
  and good will will continue for all times is our sincere desire.

  Gentlemen, in pursuance of the authority vested in the New
  York—Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission, we now transfer to
  your charge the Crown Point Memorial Lighthouse.

President John M. Thomas, D.D., of Middlebury College, representing
the Vermont Tercentenary Commission, spoke as follows:

  _Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen_: In behalf of the freemen
  of Vermont, and representing the Lake Champlain Tercentenary
  Commission of Vermont, I have the honor to transfer to the
  representative of his Excellency, Governor John A. Mead, this
  memorial of the discoverer of Lake Champlain and of the territory
  now comprising the State of Vermont. This commemorative light-tower
  is erected on a site made American soil forever by the valor of
  our Green Mountain sires. It is our will that it shall stand as a
  reminder to succeeding generations of the honor in which the men of
  the generation of the three hundredth anniversary of his discovery
  held the intrepid navigator, the scholarly explorer, and the
  Christian pioneer, Samuel Champlain.

[Illustration: Gov. John A. Dix speaking at Crown Point Memorial,
July 5, 1912]

Gov. John A. Dix of New York, in accepting the memorial and
transferring it to the United States, said:

  _Fellow-Citizens of America, and Brethren of the World, Ladies and
  Gentlemen_:

  This memorial to that great son of France, whose life and service
  we recall in gratitude and honor to-day, is peculiarly appropriate
  and expressive.

  Its foundation is grounded upon a rock, its aspect is magnificent,
  its position commanding, and its work is for the lighting of the
  way of humanity. How well it typifies the character and the deeds
  of Champlain! He had the firmness and the constancy of the rock in
  his character, the beauty of the superstructure in his life, and
  the persistency of the never-failing light in the operations of his
  mind and heart for the service of his country and mankind.

  The contrasts between his times and ours, the marvelous changes
  that have almost entirely transformed man’s environment within the
  past three hundred years, make it difficult if not impossible for
  us to-day properly to appreciate the soul-controlling purposes of
  Champlain, or estimate the sacrifices he endured in the outworking
  of those purposes.

  Contemplation of Champlain, dreamer, discoverer and hero, is,
  however, for us a stimulant to imagination and to ambition.

  To praise him because of the results that followed through the
  work of other men and later times, is as illogical as to disparage
  his character and work by taking the viewpoint of the present
  without giving due consideration, so far as people of our time can
  understand them, to the conditions and ideals of his age and the
  obstacles that he had to overcome in all he achieved.

  His journey hither may have been for conquest and not discovery.
  Upholders of this opinion cite the fact that Champlain had with
  him and used the first explosive death-dealing weapons seen by the
  Indians, and that wars between the tribes followed.

  Yet Indian wars were known before. Was not war the truest
  expression of the savage nature? Was not the Long House of the
  Iroquois the greatest war machine of the time? When in America
  was exploration free from combat, and what was land discovery but
  conquest?

  Let us receive from Samuel Champlain the inspiration of high
  aims and purpose and unselfish service to our fellow-men. Let us
  dedicate ourselves to the work so nobly begun by his indomitable
  will and fortitude in blazing the way for the American spirit of
  courage and enterprise that so greatly enriched and developed this
  northern country.

  For me it is sufficient to know that Samuel Champlain was the first
  white man here, and that the knowledge he gained was the first
  information that civilization had regarding this wondrous place.
  Moreover, I know that he was the same man whose mind conceived, as
  early as the year 1600, the utility and the plan of a ship canal
  across the Isthmus of Panama.

  Facing almost insuperable difficulties at home and braving unknown
  obstacles and dangers in the fabled New World, he made not only
  one or two, but, all told, nine voyages across the Atlantic from
  his beloved France, exploring our coasts and penetrating into the
  wilderness of our savage-ridden shores.

  Everywhere he went, he planted the cross of his inherited faith and
  the ideals of a Christian world.

  Faith in God and in one’s self, achievement for our nation and our
  race, and the power of imagination in dissolving all difficulties
  in the path of progress, are the lessons that his life teaches.

  To an American who treasures the traditions of his country and who
  reveres the one nation of Europe that to the struggling patriots
  of the Revolution gave the recognition and aid that won the day
  and established our independence, what keener pleasure can come
  than on an occasion like this to welcome with heart and hand
  the representatives of the great French nation? It was our own
  Jefferson who truly said: “Tout homme a deux patries—la sienne et
  puis la France.”

  It is indeed a high honor to join hands with the representative of
  the State of Vermont to bequeath to the Federal government for safe
  keeping and constant care this noble memorial, with the hope that
  its never-failing light may guide the wayfarer and the voyager on
  the path of safety.

  To you, Colonel Sanger, this monument is now given. (Applause.)

In the absence of Gov. John A. Mead of Vermont, who was detained at
home by slight illness, Adjt.-Gen. Lee S. Tillotson received the
memorial on behalf of the Governor of Vermont and in turn presented
it to the United States in the following address:

  _Mr. Chairman, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen_: I think
  it should be made plain that I am not the Governor of Vermont,
  otherwise my appearance as to clothing might lead some to think
  that the Governor had exercised his constitutional prerogative and
  with the consent of the Senate had assumed personal command of the
  military forces of the State and had come over here to dispute
  New York’s right to have this memorial located on New York soil.
  If this were true, it would not be the first time that the “Green
  Mountain Boys” had invaded this shore of Lake Champlain. However,
  no such hostile action is intended or necessary or possible, for
  conditions have changed. This memorial has been erected and located
  by the joint action of the Commissions of both States: New York and
  Vermont are now a part of the same nation, both subject to the same
  national government in whose custody this memorial is about to be
  placed, and from the United States of America neither New York nor
  Vermont will ever seek to take anything by force of arms.

  During the past few days, since I knew that I might be called upon
  to speak for the Governor on this occasion, I have been endeavoring
  to keep up with my everyday work, follow the events connected with
  the two great national political conventions which have been held,
  and several other local political meetings, and at the same time to
  accumulate in my mind the history of the past three hundred years.
  This effort has resulted in a state of mind which culminated last
  night in a dream in which it appeared to me that at the point in
  these ceremonies when Vermont’s share in this memorial was about
  to be surrendered into the keeping of the representative of the
  United States, there suddenly appeared on the scene one of the most
  strenuous of the recently defeated national political candidates
  and demanded that the Champlain Memorial be turned over to him as
  the only safe and rightful custodian thereof.

  I would be remiss in my duty on this occasion if I did not express
  to these Commissioners Vermont’s appreciation of their efforts
  in carrying forward so successfully this memorable celebration
  which is here completed in the dedication of this beautiful,
  substantial and useful memorial. It is to be exceedingly regretted
  that Governor Mead could not have been present in person at this
  ceremony to speak for our State. In his absence, gentlemen of the
  Vermont Commission, the Governor directs me to accept this memorial
  on behalf of the State of Vermont, and to assure you that your
  task has been well performed and that your work merits, and will
  undoubtedly receive, the approval of the people of Vermont.

  There is one thought which I would like to express to you on this
  occasion. We are all more or less influenced by the achievements
  of the past, and through the energy and the daring of such men as
  Champlain, there probably does not now remain on the earth any such
  unexplored wildernesses as was this valley when Champlain first saw
  it; even the poles have been discovered and located. It remains for
  us of the present and the future to make the best possible use of
  the advantages which we have thus gained. Let us not sacrifice the
  beauties of this Champlain Valley to the greed of commercialism.
  Let it be our effort, rather, to preserve and conserve it in all
  the magnificence of its natural resources, so that it will remain a
  haven of peace and rest to which the tired workers of the world may
  come for recreation and gain thereby renewed energy and ambition
  for future explorations into the still undiscovered realms of noble
  art, helpful literature, useful science and honest business.

  And now, by direction of the Governor of Vermont and in his name,
  our custody in this Champlain Memorial is transmitted to the
  representative of the government of the United States of America,
  to which, by this act, we again acknowledge our allegiance and
  pledge our support to the utmost extent of our resources. But while
  this memorial is thus placed in the hands of the whole people of
  these United States, I would remind you that the waters over which
  its light will shine will continue to separate, yet unite the
  shores of New York and Vermont, to one of which you must always
  come if you wish to see Champlain in all its beauty, and to both
  of which, and especially to Vermont, you will always be welcome.
  (Applause.)

President William H. Taft was unable to be present and commissioned
the Hon. William Cary Sanger of Sangerfield, former Assistant
Secretary of War of the United States, to receive the memorial on the
part of the United States and, in doing so, he spoke as follows:

  These interesting ceremonies illustrate one of the great
  principles which the founders of our country and the framers of
  our Constitution so wisely made a fundamental part of our national
  life. To each State is left the care and supervision of those
  matters which directly and exclusively concern the citizens of the
  State, and thus individuality and initiative in the development
  of local spirit and character, are stimulated and encouraged, but
  those matters which properly concern the people as a whole are
  cared for by the representatives of the people in one department or
  another of the National Government. The lighthouses are not only
  for the use of those who live in their immediate vicinity, but they
  protect the interests and they encourage the activities of all the
  people, and consequently they have been placed under the control
  and care of the National Government.

[Illustration: Col. William Carey Sanger speaking at Crown Point
Memorial, July 5, 1912]

  It was my pleasure on one occasion to hear President Eliot of
  Harvard University deliver an address on the subject, “Democracy
  and Beauty.” At first the title seemed strange, but before
  President Eliot had finished it was apparent to everyone who
  heard him that it is a privilege, as well as a duty, for those
  who constitute a democracy to see to it that what is beautiful in
  nature, in art, and in architecture, should, so far as possible, be
  brought within such easy reach of the people that the pleasure and
  benefit which come from beauty may be theirs. This lighthouse marks
  a step forward in a most important direction. It is true that our
  public buildings and our private residences and our parks have been
  growing more and more beautiful under the careful work of those who
  are responsible for them, but this is the first instance in which
  an attempt has been made to make a lighthouse a thing of beauty.
  For this, those responsible for its construction and the architect
  and the sculptor are entitled to our most grateful appreciation.
  The lighthouse will be none the less useful to the mariner and will
  be vastly more valuable to the community because architect and
  sculptor have united to make it so attractive and interesting that
  it is a pleasure to look at it.

  This light will not only guide those who voyage on these waters,
  but we can see in it and in all those other lights which mark
  our coasts and the harbors of our inland seas a symbol of what
  our national life should be, not only for our people but for the
  entire world. The lighthouse guides to the desired haven; it
  warns against shoals; in the dark and in the storm it enables the
  mariner to find his way in safety past the perils which threaten
  him. There is storm on land as well as on sea; there are in our
  national life perplexities and dangers; amid the turmoil of our
  political, business and social activities there is the right course
  which leads to the well-being of our people, and there are rocks
  of error and wrong which threaten with peril or destruction those
  who do not avoid them. May these lighthouses serve their useful and
  beneficent purpose, and may the light of liberty and truth burn so
  brightly that our country, through stress and storm, may see its
  way clear to such a course of national life as will bring to us the
  full rewards and blessings of a national life well lived and wisely
  directed.

  It is indeed a disappointment to us all, as well as to the
  President himself, that he has not been able to be present to-day.
  He has honored me by asking me to represent him, and on his behalf
  I accept for the Government of the United States this light, and
  assure you that it will ever burn to serve the splendid purpose for
  which you have created it. (Applause.)

Chairman Knapp then presented Count de Peretti de la Rocca, Chargé
d’Affaires de France, who, in the absence of the French Ambassador,
represented the Republic of France, and spoke as follows:

  I shall not speak to you about Champlain; you know more about him
  than I. Everything around here reminds you of him. And so many
  speakers more eloquent, members of the French Academy, Ambassadors,
  Senators, Governors of States, have told you of his spirit of
  enterprise, his courage, his energy, his force of character, his
  uprightness of heart. What could I add to their discourses?

  But I shall tell you how delighted I am to represent here the
  French Ambassador. My pleasure is as great as his would have been
  to be present. Mr. Jusserand told me many times how happy he
  was to commemorate on similar occasions the beginnings of this
  country, because the name of France is associated so often with
  these celebrations by which you Americans show, with such admirable
  perseverance, your remembrance of the past.

  To-day you celebrate the memory of a brave French pioneer who,
  foreseeing the future, discovered and opened up a beautiful
  country to the knowledge of mankind and to civilization. Some years
  ago you raised monuments to the leaders who came with the military
  power of France to fight for the freedom of your country.

  On another occasion, for your gratitude is considerate, you did
  honor to the memory of the French private soldiers and sailors who
  fell in the War of Independence and whose names were forgotten.
  But they shed their blood on this soil where liberty sprang forth,
  your country, and you wished that a beautiful monument at Annapolis
  should recall to posterity the memory of those modest heroes.

  All these commemorations find an echo on the other side of the
  ocean, in the sister Republic. They make up other links added to
  the long chain of friendship which binds our two countries. They
  induce Frenchmen to cross the sea, like Champlain, impelled by
  the curiosity of new things, and they discover America. At first
  they are astonished; they did not expect to see what they see in
  this country, where three centuries before only explorers dared to
  venture. And they return to France, like the delegates who came
  here recently on behalf of the France-Amérique Committee, impressed
  not only with the future of the United States but with their
  present, with their unheard of development which surprises our old
  customs, and they bring back from this young and already great
  country a store of new ideas.

  As Americans who know Paris like to return there, Frenchmen who
  once come to the United States wish to come back again; for we have
  much to learn the one from the other. Let us, therefore, see each
  other as much as possible: the more we shall know each other, the
  better we shall like each other. History encourages us to do so;
  our mutual interests recommend us to do likewise. Thank God, if
  so many Americans are the worthy descendants of the heroes of the
  Revolutionary War, there are yet in France many men of the type of
  Champlain, with the same energy, the same eagerness for knowledge,
  the same uprightness. These are characteristics of the race in that
  old France, always young, of which one of our best artists has
  portrayed the features in bronze so that you may see them there,
  in the midst of you, under the shadow of the memorial to a great
  Frenchman, who, like all Frenchmen coming over here, loved America.
  (Applause.)

The Chairman then introduced the orator of the day, the Hon. Robert
Roberts, LL. D., Mayor of Burlington, Vermont, who delivered the
following scholarly address:

  _Governor Dix, Members of the Lake Champlain Tercentenary
  Commissions, Ladies and Gentlemen_: This memorial having been
  presented and received with due ceremony, it would seem that the
  purpose for which we are assembled had been accomplished and
  that a motion to adjourn would be in order. But a programme, like a
  table of contents, is a tyrannous thing, and if a place therein is
  marked for an address it must be filled.

[Illustration: Adjutant-General Verbeck, Count and Countess de
Peretti de la Rocca and Commissioner Howland Pell

Copyrighted and by the courtesy of the Powers Engraving Co. of New York]

  I suppose this to be the last but one of the events connected with
  the Champlain Tercentenary. During the celebration, in 1909, as
  appears from the admirable and voluminous Report of the Commission,
  the dramatic history of this lake and its borderlands has been
  unfolded and illustrated in full detail by antiquarians, men of
  letters, orators, statesmen, poets, and prelates. Among the many
  representative speakers from official life were the President of
  the United States, the Ambassador from England, the Ambassador from
  France, certain high officials from the Dominion of Canada, the
  Governor of New York, a United States Senator from New York, the
  Governor of Vermont, and the Congressmen from that State. It may,
  therefore, be assumed, and the fact is, that those of us who speak
  to-day may not be harvesters but only gleaners in this fruitful
  field of local history and there is little left to garner for your
  store.

  But shall we leave this stern and rock-bound structure to stand
  cold and stark and chained to a thankless service in shedding
  abroad its light for the warning and comfort of men without some
  simple rite of baptism? Shall we abandon this sweetly serious
  embodiment of French womanhood to face, unveiled, the tempest,
  the heat of summer and the frost of winter without a word of
  benediction and without some act of homage which is her due and
  which she is wont to receive from the gallant men of her own blood?
  It is true, she is well able to face undaunted the buffeting of
  hostile circumstance. Such has been her fate for centuries. In
  coarse apparel she has tilled the fields and kept her house, and
  by the proceeds of her thrift has ransomed a nation. She has seen
  visions, and under the inspiration of heavenly voices, and clad
  in mail, she has led armies and raised the siege of a city. She
  has fought behind barricades, and with heroic dignity has bared
  her fair throat to the guillotine. With gaiety unquenched, she has
  starved through the investment of her beloved Paris. Through sore
  privation she has won a name in art, in science, and in letters.
  She embodies the just combination of qualities which make for
  fineness, elasticity, strength, health and long life. So, with
  hands upon our hearts—to La Belle France, salutation and blessing!
  May she, joined together with her strong protectors, the great
  explorer, his man-at-arms and his Indian guide, long remain to
  figure forth the beautiful in art in this setting of the beautiful
  in nature.

  The historical incidents which I may touch upon are such as
  occurred in the neighborhood of Crown Point and Ticonderoga and the
  fortresses which guarded the southern gateway of the lake.

  It is generally agreed that Champlain and his allies fought their
  first battle against the Iroquois somewhere in this vicinity. From
  his naïve story of the encounter it appears that primitive man
  dearly loves to bandy words and to fight. As the Homeric heroes,
  when face to face in combat, interchanged long and high sounding
  speeches before falling to, so did the rival war parties in 1609.
  Champlain’s account says that when his men “were armed and in
  array, they sent two canoes, set apart from the others, to learn
  from their enemies if they wanted to fight. They replied that they
  wanted nothing else but that; at the moment there was not much
  light and they must wait for the daylight to recognize each other,
  and that as soon as the sun rose they would open the battle. This
  was accepted by our men; and while we waited, the whole night was
  passed in dances and songs, as much on one side as on the other,
  with endless insults and other talk, such as the little courage we
  had, our feeble men and inability to make resistance against their
  arms, and that when we came we should find it to our ruin. Our men
  were also not lacking in retort, telling them that they should see
  such power of arms as never before, and amid such other talk as is
  customary in the siege of a city.” Champlain, at the head of his
  men, fired the first shot with his arquebuse and killed two of the
  chiefs, mortally wounding a third. The writer evidently thought
  his account of the marvellous efficacy of his weapon of precision
  needed explanation, and adds that he loaded with four bullets. It
  would be fair to expect that one bullet would go wild.

  It would be interesting if we could have the story of this fight
  from the Iroquois point of view. What impression did the outlandish
  pale-faces make upon the defending band of aborigines? What
  was their judgment as to the ethics of the invasion into their
  territory? We can well picture their demoralization upon the sudden
  killing of their three chiefs. But can sophisticated imagination
  fully grasp the degree of terror inspired by the bang of the guns
  of the explorers which broke the silence of the forest primeval?
  What do we know of that awful stillness? The Indian moved with
  catlike tread. The dip of his paddle made but a ripple. His arrow
  sped to its mark without sound. The life and death struggle for
  the survival of the fittest in the natural world went on about him
  in a silence broken only by the stifled squeak of a victim or the
  crunching of bones. The show of force in animate nature following
  patient waiting and reserve was swift and terrific, but silent—the
  swoop of the eagle upon its prey, the spring of the panther, the
  strike of the adder. The music of the denizens of the wilderness
  depended for its quality upon the general absence of sound above
  that of the waterfall or the rustling of leaves. Its various
  elemental strains—the hoot of the owl, the yell of the loon, the
  miaul of the panther, the redman’s love call, war cry and death
  song—all soared high above the symphony of inanimate nature. One
  modern political convention makes more noise in a day than the
  Indian ever heard through the centuries. Thrice and four times
  happy Iroquois!

  For a century more or less after the discovery of the lake, there
  were bloody forays, without decisive results, back and forth
  between the French and Algonquins on the North and the English and
  Iroquois on the South.

  In 1731 the French fortified a post here at Crown Point and
  called it Fort Frédéric. This was only a small stockade designed
  to accommodate thirty men. It gave place to a fortress large
  enough for 120 men, and in 1742 it was enlarged and strengthened,
  being then, with the exception of Quebec, the strongest French
  fortress in America. And under the protection of this fortress
  was the largest of the early settlements. Another small fort was
  constructed at Chimney Point opposite here, and about it groups of
  home seekers were gathered. All settlements in this neighborhood
  disappeared as soon as the French soldiers withdrew from Lake
  Champlain.

  War was not formally declared between Great Britain and France
  until 1756. In that year was completed Fort Carillon (at
  Ticonderoga), about 200 men being employed in its construction.
  In 1759, in face of siege operations by Lord Amherst, the French
  abandoned the fort, retired to Fort Frédéric, evacuated and blew up
  this fort and retired to Canada. Thus, after a full century and a
  half of more or less interrupted control, French supremacy passed
  from Lake Champlain.

  Here, at Crown Point, Amherst thereupon constructed at enormous
  expense a new fortress, the principal function of which has been to
  make a picturesque ruin and a pleasant picnic ground for the people
  of the present day.

  The blood-soaked slopes of this great waterway were hardly dry
  before the war between Great Britain and her American colonies
  broke out and these strategic points on the lake, which were vital
  as buttresses against invasion by French and Indians from Canada,
  became equally so to the colonists for safeguarding the valley from
  British occupation.

  Crown Point and Ticonderoga again became the center of interest
  and activity. The local patriots determined to seize Fort
  Ticonderoga and learned that the Green Mountain Boys were, as they
  expressed it, “the proper persons to do the job.” The story of the
  surprise and capture of the fort by Ethan Allen and his party of
  eighty-three men is authentic. The verbal form of his command to
  surrender “in the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental
  Congress” has been questioned, but it is quite in the style of his
  other sayings and his writings. Listen to his address to his little
  band before the attack:

  “Friends and fellow soldiers, you have for a number of years past
  been a scourge and terror to arbitrary powers. Your valor has been
  famed abroad and acknowledged, as appears by the advice and orders
  to me from the General Assembly of Connecticut to surprise and
  take the garrison now before us. I now propose to advance before
  you, and, in person, conduct you through the wicket gate; for
  this morning either we quit our pretensions to valor or possess
  ourselves of this fortress in a few minutes; and inasmuch as it
  is a desperate attempt, which none but the bravest of men dare
  undertake, I do not urge it on any contrary to his will. You that
  will undertake, voluntarily, poise your firelocks!”

  Allen was a primitive man, a pioneer and land speculator. Like the
  Homeric heroes and the Iroquois and Algonquin chiefs, he indulged
  in high and mighty talk before the attack. In his day and among
  his people the accomplishment of formal speech and writing was not
  common and lent distinction to its possessor, and Allen was a man
  to let his light shine in this direction.

  Ticonderoga witnessed the first lowering of His Majesty’s colors
  in the War for Independence. Allen says of this occasion: “The sun
  seemed to rise that morning with a superior lustre and Ticonderoga
  and all its defenders smiled on its conquerors who tossed about the
  flowing bowl and wished success to Congress and the liberty and
  freedom of America.”

  Shortly after, Seth Warner and his men captured the small garrison
  here at Crown Point together with 200 pieces of cannon.

  In the struggle for supremacy of the Lake Champlain district men
  fought not only for the glory of France and her religion, the glory
  of England and the spread of her institutions, the independence
  of the Colonies and the abrogation of unjust taxes, but also,
  and chiefly, as settlers, for the protection of their homes and
  the validity of their land titles. They struggled, nevertheless,
  blindly, as all men do, and were the instruments of forces and the
  larger design of which they could have no vision. Notwithstanding
  her courage, superior leadership and organization, France was
  defeated because, as has been said, “a new nation had arrived
  too great in numbers, in extent of territory, in strength of
  independent, individual character to be overwhelmed.”

  A nation may be the loser in the game of war, but a great race
  can hardly be subjugated or rubbed out. Quebec was taken, but the
  Province of Quebec is French, and New England, through immigration,
  is slowly becoming New France. Scotland and Ireland were conquered
  long ago, but the Scotch and Irish are conspicuously present with
  us to-day. It has been easy for the western Powers to blow up
  the forts of China and gain concessions, and the Chinese smile,
  seemingly acquiesce, and kotow, but in all things essential to
  themselves they yield nothing but go their own way. A few Chinese
  boys trained in American colleges have exerted a greater influence
  upon China than all the gunpowder ever manufactured could do.

  It would seem that there are forces visibly at work that make for
  peace, and this in spite of the bloody history of man and the huge
  armaments which may mean the fear of war rather than the love of
  it. Possibly it was from a willingness or even a desire to move in
  harmony with such forces that Great Britain, France, the Dominion
  of Canada and the United States of America found that without
  effort or affectation they could find in the Champlain Tercentenary
  an occasion for the interchange of words of pleasantness along the
  paths of international peace.

  In the future, then, let celebrants of the Tercentenary events
  settle all their differences by a joint meeting by the sweet waters
  of Lake Champlain.

  Men draw from the pages of history different conclusions, for they
  read with different eyes. Although we are familiar with the fact
  and the doctrine of the spread of civilization through violence,
  yet in the concomitants of war, its pomps and trappings, its glory
  and shame, its burnings and killings, its famine and pestilence,
  its bickerings and jealousies, its graft and greed and sordidness,
  its futility to effect its original purpose or to accomplish the
  greatest good, and more particularly in the nature of men and
  things, may there not be some among us who find warrant for the
  beatitude, “Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth.”
  (Applause.)

The ceremonies concluded with the following:

  Benediction by Rev. J. W. Dwyer, of Ludlow, Vt.

  O God, from whom are holy desires, right counsels and just works,
  give unto Thy servants that peace which Thou hast told us the world
  cannot give; that our hearts being given to the keeping of Thy
  commandments and the fear of enemies being removed, our days, by
  Thy protection, may be peaceful.

  May the blessings of Almighty God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost
  descend upon all here assembled, upon all whom we represent, and
  abide with us forever. Amen.

The large assemblage, including many distinguished citizens
from Vermont, then dispersed to their several homes, except the
Commissioners and their guests, who boarded the “_Ticonderoga_” for
Plattsburgh and intermediate ports.




IV. SAIL DOWN THE LAKE TO BLUFF POINT


The first stop was at Port Henry, one of the five gateways to the
Adirondacks and one of the large iron-ore ports of the country.
This picturesque village, nestling under the foothills of the
Adirondacks, the home of Commissioner Walter C. Witherbee and Hon.
Frank S. Witherbee, overlooks the lake, the Champlain Memorial
Lighthouse and historical Chimney Point on the Vermont shore. In
this town is located the principal office of Witherbee, Sherman &
Company, extensive iron producers and donors to the State of New
York of the lands on which are situated the Crown Point Forts. It
has a public library and other public buildings, churches, etc. The
steamer then proceeded northward past Westport and Essex, attractive
summer resorts on the west shore of the lake and also past Thompson’s
Point, Cedar Beach and other resorts on the east shore of the lake
to Burlington, which rises above the blue waters of the lake in some
such manner as does Naples above the blue Mediterranean. It has
its beautiful semicircular bay with its two arms, projecting far
out into the lake, similar to the beautiful bay of Naples with its
Sorrento and Posilipo, projecting far out into the sea. It has its
University, as has Naples, which has been a center of learning and
culture for many years. It rises less precipitously and with more
uniform gradation from the margin of the lake to the college campus,
where the University buildings crown the summit as does the castle
of St. Elmo the city of Naples. Its streets and avenues are broader
and better shaded than are those of Naples, but it has many points of
resemblance, which are suggestive of that rare Neapolitan fascination
not found elsewhere. Instead of the active and ever-threatening
Vesuvius, there rises in the background superbly beautiful Mt.
Mansfield silhouetted against the deep blue eastern sky. The
commanding view from the elevation of the University of Vermont to
the eastward and especially to the westward across the lake toward
the rugged Adirondacks, rising precipitously from the water’s edge
to the sky line, is such as to enable one to survey the width as
well as something of the length of the valley and appreciate its
pictorial grandeur. As the sun gilds the sky-pointing peaks and fills
the valleys with rosy light, except where drifting clouds cast their
shadows athwart the mountain ranges and as the placid waters of the
lake reflect the overarching azure sky, in an atmosphere—the clarity
of which like that on the summit of Salvatore accentuates nature’s
beauties,—one is reminded that the Champlain valley presents many
views worthy the brush of a Turner, a Corot or a Cormon. In the
poem on “Lake Champlain” by S. S. Cutting, D. D., will be found the
following:

      Oh matchless splendors! never sung nor told,
      Now golden purple, now empurpled gold!
      O’er mount and plain the heavens their tints diffuse
      And tinge the waves with iridescent hues.
      And now, when slowly fades departing day,
      The moon, full-orbed, walks her celestial way,
      And bathing all things in her silver light,
      Prolongs the beauty through the slumbering night.

The _“Ticonderoga”_ pointed westward north of the Four Brothers,
where Edward Hatch, Jr., of Lord & Taylor of New York City maintains
a hatchery for breeding and rearing lake gulls and also easterly of
Port Kent, one of the gateways to the Adirondacks. On the right were
seen some of the beautiful islands described by Samuel Champlain. One
of these was for many years the abode of that sweet bard of Grand
Isle County, Vt., the Rev. Orville G. Wheeler, who once sang in this
wise:

      Vermont, thy mountain breezes erst have fanned
      The brow of warrior bold, of statesman sage,
      And yet the poet’s mystic waving wand
      Will charm to life thy bright historic page;
      Ah such will live, the good, the great, the brave,
      Will live in grateful hearts, if not in song,
      Their hallowed deeds will never find a grave,
      Although unsung their fame may slumber long.

The steamer passed Valcour, where occurred one of the principal
naval engagements of the Revolution, in which Benedict Arnold
distinguished himself for his daring and for his adroit escape in
the night from the enemy. The Commissioners and their guests were
landed at Bluff Point and took rooms in the new Hotel Champlain,
which was built on the site of the former Hotel Champlain, burned in
the winter of 1910. Its commodious apartments, broad verandas and
commanding outlook over Cumberland Bay and the lake were admiringly
appreciated after the strenuous day’s exercises at Crown Point Forts
and the ride down the lake.


CHAMPLAIN HOTEL, BLUFF POINT, JULY 6, 1912.

The rosy-fingered dawn was eloquent with the loud, rich, skilfully
modulated song of the thrasher and the melody of the many birds that
frequent the tree-clad slopes along the shores of the lake. Nature
has with profusion bestowed her inexhaustible wealth of beauty in and
about Lake Champlain. The site of the new hotel at Bluff Point is one
of the places where this may be seen to advantage. As one gazes on
the blue waters of the lake, with its picturesque islands, stretching
far away toward the Vermont shores and over to the sloping hillsides
that lead up to the majestic Green Mountains in the distance and then
to the towering Adirondacks that wall in the lake on the west, he is
quite apt to compare the scene with that unfolded to the tourist,
who looks out from Locarno on the expanse of the blue waters of Lago
Maggiore with its charming islands and the encircling mountains,
crowned with villas and historic castles, “a perfect efflorescence
of loveliness.” The grandeur and sublimity of the Alpine scene is
to some extent compensated for by the broader expanse of undulating
waters, the larger sweep of productive valleys and verdant slopes,
“set with the homes of men,” breathing the air of freedom, whose
heritage is liberty under law.

Amid such scenes the words of William Watson occur to one,

      “       *       *       *       *       *
      Beauty, whose voice is earth and sea and air,
             *       *       *       *       *
      Who reigneth, and her throne is everywhere.”




V. CALL AT THE SUMMER SCHOOL, REVIEW OF THE FIFTH INFANTRY REGIMENT,
U. S. A., AT PLATTSBURGH BARRACKS, TOUR OF THE CITY, RECEPTION GIVEN
BY THE HON. SMITH M. WEED AND LUNCHEON AT THE FOUQUET HOUSE


The morning hours quickly passed and the Champlain Commissioners
and their guests were waited upon by a delegation of citizens of
Plattsburgh.

The Commissioners, Governor Dix, Count de Peretti de la Rocca, and
other guests left the Hotel Champlain in automobiles at 10 o’clock,
under the escort of the Reception Committee of the Chamber of
Commerce of Plattsburgh, headed by Mayor Andrew G. Senecal. They
were driven to the Catholic Summer School at Cliff Haven, where they
were formally received by Rev. Father D. J. Hickey, President of the
Summer School, who delivered the following address:

  _Your Excellency_: In the name of the trustees and patrons of the
  Catholic Summer School of America I welcome you to Cliff Haven.
  Through eighteen years of the twenty-one years of existence of this
  school we have been honored and inspired by the visits of all the
  Presidents of the country from the lamented President McKinley to
  the present President Taft. Through these years we have been also
  visited by every Governor of the Empire State, and it has been our
  happy privilege to extend to them the best reception possible.
  While we welcomed the Chief Executives of our country with joy, it
  has always been our supreme pleasure to welcome the Governors of
  our own state, as our school is under the charge of the State Board
  of Regents over which you preside. We have found in their visits an
  inspiration and encouragement in our educational work.

  Your Excellency, I regret that your visit could not have been
  later. This is the first week of our summer session, and instead of
  hundreds, thousands would have joined in this reception. The scope
  of our work is high and broad. We have the best lecturers we can
  secure to bring before us in a learned and sound manner all that
  we should know in the domain of History, Literature, Art, Science,
  Political Economy and the leading social questions. Last year 3,500
  visited the school during its session. Thirty-seven states were
  represented among its guests; so you see, the school and its work
  are well known and appreciated throughout our land. We combine here
  at Cliff Haven, the intellectual and the social in a high degree,
  and the intellectual and social are both protected and permeated by
  a religious spirit unobtrusive but all-pervading.

  Whatever promotes the well-being and uplift of the citizens of
  this country, and especially of this great Empire State over which
  you preside; whatever goes to make an enlightened and safe people;
  whatever promotes, protects and preserves the sound principles of
  the founders of our great Republic, must be dear to your Excellency
  and deserve your inspiration. This we all feel to-day in your
  presence here, in spite of your many laborious and pressing duties.
  While I invited you, I feel that your presence to-day is due to the
  persuasive eloquence of one of our trustees, Judge John B. Riley,
  who is also a member of the Champlain Tercentenary Commission.

  In the name of the trustees and patrons of the Catholic Summer
  School of America I again welcome you to Cliff Haven. (Applause.)

Appropriate response was made thereto by his Excellency, Gov. John A.
Dix.

The party was then driven to the Plattsburgh Barracks, where the
Fifth Infantry, U. S. A., on dress parade, under command of Col.
Calvin D. Cowles, was reviewed, and the cannon thundered forth
salutes in honor of the Governor and of Count de Peretti de la Rocca,
of the French Embassy at Washington. It was an imposing sight and a
reminder of the brilliant review of the same and other regiments and
the Canadian troops, on the same parade grounds, by President William
H. Taft, Ambassador Jusserand, Ambassador Bryce and Governors Hughes
and Prouty, July 7, 1909.

[Illustration: Parade in Plattsburgh, N. Y., July 6, 1912, escorted
by the Fifth Infantry, U. S. A.

Copyrighted and by the courtesy of the Powers Engraving Co. of New York]

[Illustration: Gov. Dix, Lieut.-Gov. Conway, Col. Cowles, Chairman
Knapp and Commissioner John B. Riley

Copyrighted and by the courtesy of the Powers Engraving Co. of New York]

Thereafter, a tour was made of the city, in which the party was shown
the graves of Captain George Downie and other British officers, who
had fallen in the battle of Plattsburgh. The Commissioners and other
guests were then formally received in the beautiful home of the Hon.
Smith M. Weed, on Cumberland avenue, which is situate near the
Champlain Memorial. Mr. and Mrs. George S. Weed assisted in the
reception of the distinguished guests. The guests were interested in
seeing in Mr. Weed’s library the noted painting of “The Battle of
Lake Champlain,” by Julian Oliver Davidson, a copy of which may be
seen in the original Report of this Commission.

At the close of the reception, the Commissioners and guests were
given a luncheon under the auspices of the Chamber of Commerce, at
the Fouquet House, which stands on the site of the old Stage House
occupied by Major-Gen. Benjamin Mooers, of Revolutionary military
fame, who commanded the militia in the land engagement at the Battle
of Plattsburgh. Judge and Commissioner John B. Riley presided and
extended to the Commissioners and to the guests a hearty welcome. At
the conclusion of the luncheon, the Commissioners and their guests
were escorted by a platoon of mounted police, the entire Fifth
Infantry, U. S. A., under command of Col. Cowles and staff, through
the principal streets, whose buildings were beautifully decorated.
Following the fifty automobiles containing the party were the Guard
of Honor of the Society of St. Jean Baptiste, and the Horicon,
Rescue and Lafayette Hose Companies. They proceeded to the site of
the Champlain Memorial statue, where a platform for the speakers
and guests had been erected, decorated with white and blue and the
fleur-de-lis of France. Seats had also been provided for the general
public.

[Illustration: GOVERNOR JOHN A. DIX]




VI. DEDICATORY CEREMONIES OF THE CHAMPLAIN MEMORIAL STATUE AT
PLATTSBURGH, N. Y., JULY 6, 1912


The dedicatory ceremonies, over which Chairman H. Wallace Knapp
presided, were opened with music by the Fifth Infantry, U. S. A.
Band. The Invocation was pronounced by Rev. H. P. LeF. Grabau, Rector
of the Episcopal Church of Plattsburgh.

The Champlain memorial was then unveiled by Miss Katharine M. Booth,
daughter of Judge and Commissioner John H. Booth of Plattsburgh, as
“The Star Spangled Banner” was being played by the band. As the Stars
and Stripes were drawn from the statue and it was revealed to view,
a shout of applause broke forth from the enthusiastic assembly. Then
followed a salute fired by the Fifth Infantry of the U. S. A.

The Commissioners had the memorial draped with the historic flag
owned by Dr. George F. Kunz of New York City, President of the Scenic
and Historic Preservation Society of New York, which had been offered
for the occasion and accepted. That flag had flown from the top of
the Eiffel Tower in Paris on July 4, 1900, when the Lafayette statue
by Paul Bartlett was presented by the school children of America to
the French nation. It was also used at the dedication of Stony Point
Park on the Hudson, and on the funeral train when the remains of
Governor Clinton were transferred from New York to Kingston.

Senator H. Wallace Knapp, Chairman of the New York Lake Champlain
Tercentenary Commission, then delivered the following address:

  _Your Excellency, Governor Dix, Ladies and Gentlemen_: We are
  assembled on an historical spot that may properly lay claim
  to official recognition, for associations connected with the
  progress of humanity in the Champlain Valley and this vicinity
  are especially to be distinguished for the important events that
  are known to have proceeded from the subject that we are here to
  recall.

  The battles of Valcour and Plattsburgh, and the maintenance here of
  a permanent military post, are vitally connected with conditions
  attending the passing through the lake of the first white man.

  The patriotic spirit has never slumbered here. The sons of this
  county and of the city of Plattsburgh who have dedicated their
  lives to the service of their country, in the army and navy and
  in civic councils form a long roll of distinguished honor. They
  have upheld the integrity of their country in every quarter of the
  globe, and their deeds are glowing on the pages of history. And
  this public service has been continuous since the first settlement
  here. This record has not been interrupted. Here surely, then, our
  Memorial may be safely entrusted to fulfill its purpose and we
  may leave it here, as in its long appointed home, telling to the
  future, with voiceless eloquence, the meaning of the scene that
  appears before us.

  For when we have gone away there will appear in the ensuing quiet
  a significance here that can hardly be discerned through the
  sounds and the pageantry of the present hour. Now we look upon the
  brave soldier, the intrepid sailor, the grand discoverer, the wise
  administrator, the successful courtier, and the gallant friend
  of kings. But when we are here alone and undistracted we shall
  recognize a deeper and more abiding import. We shall recall his
  unfailing goodness of heart, his helpful and untiring care for his
  associates, his generous mercy to the traitor, Vignan, his motto
  that the saving of one soul was more worthy of endeavor than the
  conquest of an empire. We shall know Champlain as the devoted lover
  of his fellow-man, and in this philosophy we shall find the basic
  motive of his career, and indeed I think it is for the charm of
  such qualities shining through virile manhood that we most love to
  remember him. The Spanish conquerors were strong and venturesome,
  but there is no gathering of many peoples to do honor to their
  memory; no songs are sung for Cortez and Pizarro.

  Our Monument will always be an inspiring influence for good and
  as time goes on, piety and poesy and song will enrich the memory
  of our hero, and romance will cast a halo around his deeds. It is
  perhaps from such beginnings that all the great epics of the world
  have been developed, yet none of them, it is safe to say, have
  proceeded from a nobler basis of character and action.

  We are inaugurating our Memorial under happy conditions. A century
  of peace between France, England, and America bespeaks a perpetuity
  of good will. Their representatives have taken part in all the
  important functions of the Tercentenary observances and they are
  here to-day with messages of cheer and friendship.

[Illustration: Miss KATHARINE M. BOOTH

Daughter of Hon. John H. Booth, Unveiling Champlain Memorial at
Plattsburgh, July 6, 1912

Copyrighted and by courtesy of Powers Engraving Co., N. Y. City]

[Illustration: Front View of Memorial and Granite Approach to
Samuel Champlain at Plattsburgh]

  At Crown Point on May 3d of this year, Mr. Hanotaux, who led the
  French delegation entrusted with the presentation of the bust, “La
  France”, to the United States, remarked in his address:

  A French delegation has come to seal upon the base of this
  magnificent monument an image of France. It expresses well what
  we have wished to say; it will depict to you France, such as we
  Frenchmen conceive it, and as we love it. It is France as she
  wishes to be and as she is.

  Perhaps it is not amiss to supplement this sentiment by pointing
  out that we have chosen as the historic genius of our lake, not an
  American, nor an Englishman, but a Frenchman, who represents to
  us France and the sons of France as we know them and as we wish
  them to be. He was for us the crowning exemplar of ideal chivalry,
  without fear and without reproach,—the first of many Frenchmen
  through whom we owe so much to France. But such a character belongs
  to the world. His representation here presides over the scenes of a
  great historic epoch that will never be repeated. Our house is no
  longer divided: England and America will never again contend upon
  the battlefield.

  Samuel Champlain was called to his reward on Christmas day, the
  anniversary of the Prince of Peace and Good Will throughout the
  world. That peace is now assured us by the peoples who have
  gathered here, and as time goes on and the agencies of human
  happiness increase within our border, the silent form above us will
  tell His Master’s message with an eloquence that we in our day
  cannot hear so well. (Applause.)

I now take pleasure in presenting to you His Excellency, Gov. John A.
Dix.

Governor Dix spoke as follows:

  Admiring to-day this beautiful statue of Champlain, this splendid
  embodiment of genius and patriotism, it seems as if one were gazing
  upon it through the vista of a beautiful parkway. The statue, in
  all its edifying beauty, is here before us, and yet its influence
  and its meaning carry the mental eye adown three centuries of
  visualization of civilizing events—sad and happy, depressing and
  gladdening, horrible and glorious, all necessary in the foliage of
  the avenue of progress through which the mind perceives and tries
  to understand the character of the man whom we here honor.

  Have you, in walking along the parkway of a city’s breathing-place
  or the lane of an arbored village, at the end of your line of
  vision, come upon a solitary figure—a monument, a great tree, the
  section of a home with a cupola upon it, or whatever it may be that
  by its height and loneliness interrupt and end the vista? Have you
  noticed that the width of the vista is seemingly greatest where you
  stand, and gradually diminishes until at the finishing point it is
  narrow, very narrow?

  As I view this product of man’s acknowledgment of his indebtedness
  to the past, and of man’s ability to express for the present and
  for the ages to come his conception of his obligation to heroes and
  pioneers, I seem to be looking from this statue down the vista of a
  parkway of the three centuries between Champlain and us.

  On either side stand sublime events of history, with the sun of
  Hope and Faith shining above. Here and there trees shut off the
  sunshine, while others only serve to beautify and embroider that
  sunshine as it filters through their verdant branches. And all
  the while the roadway of civilization grows gradually from the
  narrowness of the past to the breadth and the warmth of the present.

  This is the picture as it presents itself to my mind, of the
  historic event we celebrate and its true meaning.

  We, of the more tolerant, more enlightened, and, I hope, happier
  world, of the year 1912, see in this statue the heroic figure of
  the intrepid explorer, who was the pioneer of civilization in this
  magnificent region of country. His was the narrower world, perhaps,
  but to him belongs the immortal fame of beginning the gradual
  broadening of the way which, through war and sacrifice, honor and
  glory, leads to our present proud position among the nations of the
  world.

  Since the plan of this Tercentenary celebration of Champlain’s
  discovery was so well inaugurated and so well organized, tributes
  of the ablest orators, the greatest writers, and the foremost
  officials of state and nation, have been paid to the character
  and the achievements of Samuel Champlain. Words seem now almost
  superfluous, for what can be said that will add to the fullness
  and the beauty and the sincerity of the expressions of honor and
  appreciation which have been placed upon the enduring records of
  time.

  Champlain truly typifies the chivalry, the intrepidity and the
  charm of the people of his time and country. The best tribute that
  has been paid to him, I think, was that of Hamilton W. Mabie, and
  with Mr. Mabie’s words I will close: “A gentleman by birth and
  training, calm in danger, resourceful and swift in action, strict
  in discipline, but always just and kind.” (Applause.)

[Illustration: Gov. John A. Dix speaking at the Champlain Memorial at
Plattsburgh, July 6, 1912

Copyrighted and by the courtesy of Powers Engraving Co. of New York]

Gov. John A. Mead of Vermont was officially represented by the
Adjutant-General of that State, Col. Lee S. Tillotson of St. Albans,
who was introduced and delivered the following address:

  _Mr. Chairman, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen_: My
  position here to-day reminds me of the story of the old colored
  gentleman who was being prosecuted for the usual misdemeanor
  of stealing chickens. When his case was called, the judge, who
  knew the culprit, looking down into the prisoner’s box where he
  was seated, said: “Uncle Rastus, are you the respondent in
  this case?” “No, yo’ honah,” said Uncle Rastus, “I’se not de
  respondent, I’se got a lawyer here who is goin’ to do all de
  respondin’ fo’ me; I’se de ge’man who done stole de chickens.” In
  this case, I am the respondent. The gentleman whom you invited
  and expected to be present to-day has not stolen any chickens,
  but he is, unfortunately for you and for him, detained at home
  by a slight attack of rheumatism, and when I tell you that it
  was contracted while attending as a delegate the recent national
  Republican convention at Chicago, you will not be surprised to
  learn that his malady is inflammatory in its nature. But I want
  to tell you that Governor Mead is not tying up his sore places
  with the red bandanna handkerchief. I don’t know how you feel over
  here, but we in Vermont do not think that the facts and events
  incident to the present presidential administration afford any man
  the right, constitutional or otherwise, to charge President Taft
  with fraudulent practices. I know that this is not the proper time
  nor place to talk politics, but, as you may have guessed, I am a
  Republican, and we Republicans don’t have much incentive to blow
  our political horns in Vermont, because everybody over there agrees
  with us, and the inspiration of this opportunity in Governor Dix’s
  jurisdiction was too strong to be resisted. However, I think we had
  better get on to a safer topic of discussion. (Laughter.)

  I suppose that on this occasion I ought to talk about history,
  but I don’t know enough. I don’t even know whether the battle
  of Plattsburgh was a land engagement or an aerial contest. The
  weather is usually a reasonably safe topic, but the temperature
  here for the past few days has been so hot that it won’t admit of
  public comment. So I have decided to talk about the scenery. I
  think I have made a discovery. I have often wondered why it was
  that you New Yorkers were so much more successful in attracting
  summer visitors to your territory than we in Vermont. Since I
  have been over here I have discovered the reason. It is because
  of the magnificent scenery afforded you on this side of the lake
  of the Green Mountains of Vermont. You have been capitalizing our
  resources without our permission. Now you must even things up, and
  I want to tell you that your Adirondack Mountains appear to much
  better advantage, and are grander and more magnificent from the
  viewpoint of the Vermont shore than from anywhere else. If you
  don’t believe it, come over and see for yourselves. You will find
  in Vermont just as warm a welcome, just as comfortable hotels, just
  as good roads, and just as refreshing water,—and other things,—as
  anywhere else.

  And now, Mr. Chairman, in closing, I wish to extend to you and the
  members of your Commission, the Governor’s regrets, and mine, that
  he was not able to be with you personally, and to thank you for the
  many courtesies which you have shown to my friends and myself on
  this occasion. (Applause.)

Plattsburgh has many enterprising citizens and has had some liberal
benefactors. In the latter class, the name of the Hon. Francis Lynde
Stetson of New York City, a native of Clinton county and long-time
resident of Plattsburgh, will be cherished in grateful remembrance
for his many beneficent acts to that city. It was quite natural,
therefore, that he accept the Champlain memorial in behalf of the
city of Plattsburgh, which he did in the following touching address:

  _Governor Dix_: Through the kind favor of the Mayor of the city
  of Plattsburgh and in his behalf, I take pleasure in accepting
  from you this fine gift of the State of New York, worthily set in
  this beautiful park provided by the liberality of the people of
  Plattsburgh. The location is ideal, overlooking the most attractive
  and the most famous bay of this lovely lake, which, unlike most
  North American waters, bears the name of the discoverer, bestowed
  by himself. To those here seeking for his monument, as in the case
  of Sir Christopher Wren, the answer during three centuries might
  well have been, “look about you.” But now in the fullness of time,
  the accumulating admiration of many generations has demanded and
  has found concrete expression in this beautiful memorial of the
  character, the constancy and the courage of Samuel Champlain, the
  Christian Explorer. This work of man’s hands cannot enhance his
  fame, but it can and will indicate to countless generations our
  capacity to appreciate his virtue.

  To carry abroad the gospel of his Lord and Master; to extend the
  influence and the prosperity of his beloved country; to replace
  savagery with orderly government and religious civilization, he
  crossed the Atlantic twenty times; he traced its western shore from
  Newfoundland to Cape Cod; he explored the Isthmus of Darien, and
  proposed to join the two oceans; he pierced the Laurentian forests,
  and discovered not only Champlain but also Nipissing and Huron;
  and he became the founder of New France. For more than a score of
  years he ruled in justice and equity, winning the hearts of his
  countrymen and the almost idolatrous affection of the savage tribes
  of Canada. His integrity was spotless, his sincerity unquestioned;
  and his piety was attested by his last will, devoting to religion
  his entire estate of about $1,000.

  That we should give ourselves for others, for community and for
  country is supposed to be a call specially significant of the
  present hour. But three centuries since it was heard and was
  followed by Samuel Champlain at the sacrifice of much that most
  men deemed desirable. Luxurious ease at the royal court of Henri
  IV. he despised, and through unbroken forests led the way for
  civilization, thus answering the question of the Duke in “As You
  Like It”:

                              “Are not these woods
      More free from peril than the envious court?”

  In the deep fastnesses of the forests he carried the cross as his
  amulet and sought the salvation of souls.

  This day can show no higher type nor profess a nobler faith than
  his. This poor French boy of Brouage by three-score years of
  faithful duty proved that virtue is not the monopoly of any age or
  country or class; and that to help the world greatly forward no
  special calling is necessary. All that is needed is the faithful
  following of high ideals. Such was the accomplishment of Champlain
  and such, two centuries later, of the other great hero of these
  waters, the chivalrous and God-fearing Macdonough, soon to be
  honored by a monument on this shore.

  It is well that this generation should make recognition of such
  lives, proving that love toward God and man and its constant
  expression in a consistent life are not incompatible with the
  development and exhibition of the most heroic and manly virtues.

  But to limit our recognition to the raising of a monument were
  indeed an empty show. Those who without genuine and active sympathy
  would build the tombs of the prophets and garnish the sepulchres of
  the righteous were denounced by the Master as hypocrites.

  Life service and not lip service is required of those who would
  perpetuate, and should emulate the virtues of Champlain.

  This monument is erected to him and not through the pretext of his
  name to ourselves. But, in a sense it must imply a sympathetic
  appreciation by this generation and this community. Let the deed
  follow the profession. Self-sacrifice, integrity, devotion to duty,
  truth-telling, clean-living and love of God and man must be the
  aim of every man, woman and child who in heart and truth helps
  raise this monument. The aim I say, but, only by God’s help, the
  achievement, for to few are given the enduring fortitude and the
  prevailing persistence of Champlain and Macdonough.

  That this monument shall stand and shall continue to stand a silent
  but effective monitor, teaching the men, the women, the boys and
  the girls of this valley to lead clean and helpful lives, and to
  leave behind them memories which shall encourage others so to live,
  is the hope in which this gift is accepted and will be preserved.
  (Applause.)

Ambassador J. J. Jusserand was unavoidably absent on a visit to
the Republic from which he is accredited to this country. He was
represented, however, on this occasion by Count de Peretti de la
Rocca, Chargé d’Affaires de France, at Washington. Count de Peretti
de la Rocca was introduced and spoke as follows:

  It is often said that America looks always to the future. The
  beautiful festivities at which we are assisting prove the contrary.
  Descendants of the pioneers of former times on this continent,
  which they opened up to civilization, you are continuing their
  work. Animated by their spirit of daring and activity, you are
  extending each day the field of their conquests, and you are
  reaping the fruits of the harvest of their deeds. But you like
  sometimes to stop your daily toil, to come and meditate before the
  rude cradle of your great nation.

  To-day, pleasure boats sail on this beautiful lake, and its shady
  banks seem to have been intended always as a place of rest for
  tired city dwellers. It is not without some effort of imagination
  that we can now recall the rugged Champlain and his strange troop,
  sailing on the same lake in pursuit of the Iroquois. However, you
  wished that the tourists, who come here each year in thousands,
  surrounded by luxury and beauty, should be reminded of their
  first great predecessor. And you have raised up to Champlain
  this monument, which does honor both to the initiative of your
  Commissions and to the talents of your architects. You found that
  there was in the life of Champlain, as in those of the other French
  pioneers, of whom your historian, Parkman, so well wrote the lives,
  lessons which should not be lost. The example of their ingenuity,
  which nothing could rebut, of their energy, which nothing could
  daunt, of their faith, which never was discouraged, is still a
  lesson of confidence and optimism. Pessimistic persons might
  perhaps point out that these men failed to attain their ends. They
  traveled over this continent seeking a way to China, and that way
  did not exist. Anyway, they hoped that the countries which they
  discovered would become the possessions of their nation and of
  their King, and now the lilies of the French monarchy have been
  replaced by the Stars and Stripes of the American democracy. But
  these are only partial failures and their efforts were not in vain.
  China remained closed to them, but America and its treasures were
  opened to them. The vicissitudes of events have caused a change of
  nationality in the countries discovered by them, but I am sure they
  are content in their graves on account of celebrations of their
  memory such as that of to-day: on account also of the unalterable
  friendship which binds your nation to theirs and especially on
  account of the confident eagerness with which, inherited from them,
  you continue and complete their work.

  Now, ladies and gentlemen, if you permit me I will add some words
  in my own language.

  Cela ne sera pas pour déplaire à mon grande compatriote Champlain.
  Je tiens à exprimer au Gouverneur Dix at au Chairman Knapp tous mes
  remerciements pour la manière si flatteuse at si affectueuse dont
  ils ont parlé de mon pays. Je veux vous dire à tous combien je suis
  heureux et reconnaissant que le souvenir de la France ait été si
  intimement associé à ces belles cérémonies.

  Enfin j’ajouterai combien j’ai été touché par l’aimable accueil que
  nous a réservé la cité de Plattsburgh dont la beauté des paysages,
  le pittoresque des rues et des maisons, le charme des habitants
  m’ont tout spécialement frappé. Aussi est-ce du fond de coeur que
  je forme les voeux les plus ardents pour la continuation de sa
  prospérité.

The address was enthusiastically received.

The Hon. John A. Stewart of New York was the next speaker and in the
course of his address, which was extempore and therefore unreported
except in substance, he said:

  From Champlain’s day we have grown into the most potential nation
  in the world, but let us thank God that mere power is not the
  measure of a nation’s greatness. We have become the richest nation
  in the world, but every day of our existence we should give thanks
  to the Almighty that our standing among the nations rests upon
  another basis than the mere possession of great wealth. We are
  the most populous among the nations of advanced civilization, but
  we should thank God that the gauge of our power and our greatness
  does not lie merely in superiority in point of numbers. A nation
  like the individual is great only to the degree of the possession
  of the homely virtues, the virtues of the home and fireside,
  of contentment and the peace and satisfaction which come from
  honest toil, from the day’s tasks done in the proper spirit of
  thankfulness for all the blessings which have come from advantages
  given by a prodigal nature. The prophetic vision of Champlain which
  saw occupying the North American continent a great and a mighty
  people has been realized. It is to men of Champlain’s blood that we
  owe the searching out and the discovery of the fertility of this
  great land and its adaptation for the uses of mankind. To those
  of his own race, who have succeeded him, we Americans are tied
  by the bond of a common destiny. Though separated politically,
  Canada, which is the heritage of Champlain, and this beautiful
  north country which is equally his heritage and one of the most
  beautiful parts of the great Republic, stand shoulder to shoulder
  in the working out of a common fate; for no danger can menace the
  one without the other sharing in that danger and no great national
  blessing can come to the one without that same blessing working
  its benefit to the other. Blessed is the land and blessed the
  people where the homely virtues are still inculcated, where that
  admonition of the Almighty is regarded not merely as an article of
  faith, but as a precept to be followed, “Honor thy father and thy
  mother that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God
  giveth thee,” for of such is the land which Champlain found and the
  people which bless him as the great discoverer. (Applause.)

The last speaker was the Hon. Job E. Hedges of New York City, whose
address sparkled with wit and kept the audience in a ripple of
laughter. It was also extempore. In the course of his address he said:

  The specific things Champlain did are not so important as his
  motive. He was an epoch in history. It falls to few men to be
  greater than their generation. If we are to draw a lesson at this
  time, it is that physical courage unbacked by moral effort is
  futile. It is very easy to be good rhetorically. I believe in the
  efficacy of prayer, but it is possible to remain on your knees so
  long that you overlook a neighbor’s distress.

  It is better to try and fail than not to endeavor. Champlain
  never felt that he was called—he just went. He never worried
  about prosperity. He framed his opinions without asking himself
  whether he was in the majority or not. It is better to practice
  one commandment and forget the other nine than have all of them
  committed to memory as a rhetorical exercise.

  It is a great thing to have a man’s memory remain 300 years without
  tarnish—or even 300 days without it. It is a wonderful thing to be
  great and not know it. Champlain could have closed his eyes forever
  at the end of any twenty-four hours of his life and have said, “I
  have done the best I could.” (Applause.)

Benediction was then pronounced by the Rt. Rev. Monsignor M. J.
Lavelle, Vicar General of New York, as follows:

  Father of Bounty from Whom all blessings flow, we thank Thee
  from the inmost recesses of our souls for the blessings bestowed
  upon our country and the human race, through the courage and
  self-sacrifice of Samuel Champlain. This monument dedicated to his
  memory to-day, is a token, primarily, of our gratitude to Thee
  for the favors Thou hast granted us through Thy servant. Teach
  us all to be like him, intrepid in danger, indomitable in trial,
  undismayed in failure and unspoiled in success. May everyone who
  has participated in the erection and dedication of this monument
  have the grace to direct his own life in the way of happiness and
  virtue, and also to be a source of benediction unto generations yet
  unborn.

  We pray Thee, O Father of Might, Wisdom and Justice, through
  Whom alone authority is rightfully administered, laws enacted
  and judgment decreed, assist with Thy Holy Spirit of Counsel
  and Fortitude, the President of these United States, that his
  administration may be eminently useful to Thy people over whom he
  presides, by the encouragement of virtue and religion, by wise
  enforcement of the laws in justice and in mercy, and by repressing
  vice and immorality. Let the Light of Thy Divine Wisdom shine upon
  the deliberations of Congress, and manifest itself in all the laws
  framed for our government, that these regulations may tend to
  the preservation of peace, the extension of National prosperity,
  the increase of industry, sobriety and useful knowledge, and may
  perpetuate amongst us the boon of equal liberty.

  We pray also for the Governors of these two states, for the members
  of the Legislatures, for all judges and magistrates and other
  officials appointed to guard our political welfare. Aid them with
  Thy guiding hand, that they may be able to discharge the duties of
  their several offices with honesty and ability.

  We pray also for all our brethren and fellow-citizens throughout
  the United States, that they may be blessed in the knowledge, and
  sanctified in the performance of Thy Holy Will. Preserve us in
  unity, and in that peace which the world cannot give. And after
  having tasted Thy bounty here below, may we be admitted to the joys
  that are eternal.




Part Three

CONCLUSION




I. FEDERAL CO-OPERATION AND ASSISTANCE RENDERED BY SENATORS OF THE
UNITED STATES, REPRESENTATIVES IN CONGRESS AND OTHERS.


This record would be incomplete without reference to the active
co-operation of the Government of the United States in authorizing
formal invitations to be extended through the Department of State to
the Republic of France and the Kingdom of Great Britain including the
Dominion of Canada to be officially represented at the Tercentenary
Celebration and in making ample appropriation for the entertainment
of the foreign guests and of the President, Vice-President and other
officials of the United States; and without formal acknowledgment
in appreciation of the activities and assistance rendered by
Vice-President James S. Sherman, whose grandfather was a navigator of
Lake Champlain, and by the Senators of New York and Vermont and other
states in the Senate of the United States and by the Representatives
from those states in Congress. The New York and Vermont members of
the Committee on Foreign Affairs, namely, Hon. James Breck Perkins,
a writer on French history; Hon. David J. Foster, Hon. Jacob
Sloat Fassett and Hon. Francis Burton Harrison, all forceful and
influential Representatives, assisted by Hon. John J. Fitzgerald,
Hon. Edward B. Vreeland, Hon. George R. Malby, Hon. James S. Sherman,
Hon. Michael E. Driscoll, Hon. John W. Dwight, Hon. William H.
Draper, Hon. George N. Southwick, Hon. William Sulzer, Hon. William
S. Bennet, Hon. Jacob Van Vechten Olcott, Hon. Peter A. Porter, Hon.
De Alva S. Alexander, and other Representatives of New York, and
Hon. Kittredge Haskins of Vermont, were zealous in their support of
the project from its inception. On February 16, 1909, Representative
Foster of Vermont from the Committee on Foreign Affairs reported the
following Joint Resolution favorably to the House, viz.:

  Joint resolution (H. J. Res. 257) to authorize the Secretary
  of State to invite the Governments of France and Great Britain
  to participate in the proposed tercentenary celebration of the
  discovery of Lake Champlain by Samuel de Champlain.

  WHEREAS, The States of New York and Vermont, by
  legislation and appropriation, have authorized the celebration of
  the three hundredth anniversary of the discovery of Lake Champlain
  by Samuel de Champlain; and

  WHEREAS, The date of the said celebration has been fixed
  for the first week in July, 1909; Therefore be it

  _Resolved, etc._, That the Secretary of State be, and he is hereby,
  authorized and requested to extend to the Governments of France and
  Great Britain an invitation to be present at and to participate in
  the proposed celebration during the first week of July, 1909, to
  commemorate the three hundredth anniversary of the discovery of
  Lake Champlain by Samuel de Champlain.

When said resolution was reached on the House Calendar on February
17th, Mr. Foster said:

  Mr. Speaker, there is very little to be said by the way of
  explanation of this resolution. A very full report accompanies it
  explaining fully the significance of the proposed celebration.
  As indicated in the preamble, both the States of New York and
  Vermont have appropriated money for this celebration, which will
  occur during the first week of next July. While these two states
  have taken the initiative, the occasion will be one of national
  significance. We are already assured that the President of the
  United States will be present and participate in the exercises.
  And the occasion will be one of international importance. For this
  reason it is desired that authority be given the State Department
  to extend an invitation to the two nations most intimately
  associated with the United States in the historic event which this
  celebration will commemorate. It was a son of France who discovered
  the beautiful body of water that bears his name. Canada, that
  loyal dominion of Great Britain, borders upon the lake. It is
  peculiarly desirable, therefore, that an invitation be extended to
  the Governments of France and Great Britain to participate in the
  celebration.

The Joint Resolution after a brief discussion was thereupon
unanimously passed.

The Report of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs was printed in
full in the Congressional Record of March 3, 1909, in the form in
which it was adopted and appears in the Appendix of this Report.
(See Congressional Record 60th Congress, Second Session, pp. 2531,
2582 and 3770.)

Speaker Joseph G. Cannon, Representative James A. Tawney of
Minnesota, Chairman of Committee on Appropriations and other members
of the House from states not in direct touch with the undertaking
gave it their support.

The Joint Resolution was favorably reported through Senator Henry
Cabot Lodge from the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate on
February 24, 1909, and on motion of Senator Chauncey M. Depew it was
passed. (See Congressional Record 60th Congress, Second Session, p.
2987.)

Senator Thomas C. Platt of New York and Senators William P.
Dillingham and Carroll S. Page of Vermont also gave this and other
matters pertaining to the celebration such consideration as was
necessary to ensure Federal co-operation. The Joint Resolution was
approved by President Roosevelt on March 2, 1909. (See Congressional
Record 60th Congress Second Session, p. 3666.)

In this connection it will be remembered that Senator Redfield
Proctor of Vermont and the Honorable Elihu Root, while Secretary of
State had presented the matter at a late day in a prior session of
Congress and had in a measure prepared the way for favorable action
in 1909. Senator Proctor took deep interest in the project, but
to the great regret of his many friends he did not live to see it
carried to completion. His death occurred in Washington, D. C., March
4, 1908.

His son, the Honorable Fletcher D. Proctor, while Governor of Vermont
in 1906, had approved the original Concurrent Resolution, introduced
in the House of Representatives of Vermont in November of that year
by Hon. Robert W. McCuen of Vergennes, providing for the appointment
of a Commission to confer with several Commissions to be appointed
in New York and in Canada to arrange for a celebration of the Three
Hundredth Anniversary of the Discovery of Lake Champlain.

From that time on Senator Redfield Proctor and Governor Fletcher D.
Proctor of Vermont gave the matter their official and strong personal
support as long as they lived.

Congressmen George R. Malby and David J. Foster were untiring in
their efforts to insure Federal co-operation, as was Honorable Elihu
Root, both as Secretary of State and as United States Senator, whose
masterly address at Plattsburgh on July 7, 1909, is a contribution to
the history of the Iroquois Confederacy.

The untimely deaths of Governor Fletcher D. Proctor, of Congressmen
David J. Foster and George R. Malby before the Champlain memorials
were dedicated and the work of the Commissions completed, to whose
success they had all materially contributed, were deeply deplored.
The loss of Professor Walter E. Howard of the Vermont Commission and
of Assemblyman Alonson T. Dominy of New York Commission, both of
whom were desirous of co-operation in the work of their respective
Commissions, was keenly felt by their colleagues.

Senators John Raines and Thomas F. Grady of New York, who were
majority and minority leaders of the Senate when the project was
given legislative sanction, did not live to see the Champlain
memorials constructed. Senator Patrick H. McCarren of Brooklyn, who
assisted in interesting the Representatives in Congress from the City
of New York in the celebration, did not live to participate in it
himself.

All these friends of the project in its initial and later stages will
be remembered for their interest in this historical commemorative
celebration, the results of which have been felt in both hemispheres
in strengthening the amicable relations existing between the three
great nations participating in the international festivities. Its
scope in a measure was outlined in the presentation of the matter
to the Legislative Committees, making the original and second
appropriation, over which Senators William W. Armstrong and Jotham P.
Allds in the Senate and Hon. Edwin A. Merritt, Jr., in the Assembly,
presided.




II. BRIEF REVIEW OF THE WORK OF THE COMMISSION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
IN APPRECIATION OF THE ASSISTANCE RENDERED BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
FOREIGN NATIONS, MILITARY ORGANIZATIONS AND OTHERS.


An outline of the work of the Commission was embodied in the
recommendations adopted at the conclusion of the investigation and
deliberation of the Preliminary Commission, found at pages 21 to
40 of the First Report of this Commission. Some modifications in
the original plan were found necessary as the preparation for the
celebration took definite form, but in the main there was substantial
adherence to the original recommendations of the Preliminary
Commission as may be seen from an examination of the Tercentenary
Exercises and the transactions of the Commission hereinbefore given
in some detail which involved, in addition to the celebration,
the construction of two memorials to Samuel Champlain in the
Champlain valley. One of these was a joint memorial constructed by
the Vermont and New York Commissions in co-operation from funds
jointly contributed by the two Commissions. That is the Champlain
memorial at Crown Point Forts. Without the friendly assistance and
co-operation of the Vermont Tercentenary Commission in planning and
in sharing the expense involved in the construction of the Crown
Point memorial, it is not likely that two memorials would have been
built. This Commission takes this occasion to make permanent record
of the fact that the members of the Vermont Commission were quite as
desirous of erecting a fitting memorial to Samuel Champlain as were
the members of the New York Commission, notwithstanding the fact that
it was apparent to them that the joint memorial was likely to be
located within the confines of the State of New York, rather than in
Vermont. Undoubtedly the character of the memorial in the form of a
lighthouse and its location on a point projecting far into the waters
of the lake where it may be seen quite as readily by the citizens
of Vermont as by those of New York, had something to do in bringing
about unanimity of sentiment in the action of the two Commissions in
deciding to erect a joint memorial.

It is hoped that this memorial will stand for all time as a monument
to the wisdom of the two Commissions in thus performing a public
duty in the spirit of fairness to the people of both states and in
grateful appreciation of the character and services to humanity of
Samuel Champlain. It met with the hearty approval of the French
delegation, who placed on it the Rodin bust, a work of art, selected
by M. Hanotaux and others and purchased with funds contributed by His
Excellency, Clément Armand Fallières, President of the Republic of
France, M. Raymond Poincaré, President of the Council and Minister
of Foreign Affairs, recently elected President of the Republic of
France and many others, as the seal of the Republic of France. They
spoke in commendation of its artistic proportions and of its unique
symbolism of the diffusion of the light of civilization through the
valley by Champlain and his followers, who sought to inculcate in the
“untutored minds” of the savages in the region the humane principles
and benign precepts of the Christian religion.

The Champlain Memorial Statue at Plattsburgh was erected by the
New York Commission out of the funds appropriated solely by the
Legislature of New York. It occupies a commanding position at the
outlet of the Saranac river overlooking the lake. The bronze statue
of Champlain, the crouching Indian at its base and the granite
approach together constitute an unique memorial, artistic in outline
and worthy the discoverer of the lake, which bears his name. This
will stand comparison with any memorial of the kind in the country.

The Commission submits these two memorials to the considerate
judgment of the people of the State in the confidence that they will
meet with general approval.

The Commission has thus constructed two suitable permanent memorials
to Samuel Champlain in the valley as it was authorized to do by
Chapter 181 of the Laws of 1911. In this as in other matters the
Commission has endeavored to carry out the spirit as well as the
letter of the acts under which it performed its labors.

In addition to the building of the Champlain memorials, the
Celebration with its varied literary, military and naval features was
carried to a successful conclusion by the Lake Champlain Tercentenary
Commissions of New York and Vermont with the co-operation of the
Government of the United States and the attendance of the official
representatives of France, Great Britain and Canada. The Dominion
of Canada sent over the Governor-General’s Foot-Guards under Lieut.
Colonel D. R. Street with twenty-two officers and three hundred and
eleven enlisted men and also the Fifth Royal Canadian Highlanders
under Lt. Colonel George S. Cantlie with twenty-eight officers and
four hundred and thirty-eight men.

The participation of the Canadian troops in their brilliant uniforms
in the Plattsburgh and Burlington parades on July 7 and 8, 1909,
gave color to the marching columns and elicited the commendation of
President Taft as well as of the French and British Ambassadors. It
was a graceful compliment on the part of the Canadian Government
to the people of the United States and gratefully appreciated by
members of the Commission and others interested in the success of the
celebration, to which this contributed not a little.

The presence of the French Ambassador, His Excellency, J. J.
Jusserand, the British Ambassador, the Right Honorable James Bryce,
the Postmaster-General of the Dominion of Canada, the Honorable
Rodolphe Lemieux, the Premier of the Province of Quebec, Sir Lomer
Gouin, the Lieut.-Governor of the Province of Quebec, Sir Adolphe
Pelletier, the Vice-Admiral of the Japanese Navy, Baron Stakichi Uriu
and others officially representing their respective Governments, gave
it international significance, and the history of Lake Champlain in
this and other ways has become a matter of interest to the people of
other lands.

The participation of these distinguished representatives of France,
Great Britain, Canada and Japan in the Tercentenary Exercises added
dignity and stateliness to the public and social functions of the
celebration, which was widely commended through the press of this and
other countries and has since become known as one of the principal
commemorative celebrations of the century.

The discriminating and brilliant addresses of the French Ambassador,
well known as the author of “The Literary History of The English
People” and of many other works, as well as for his celebrity as
a great diplomat, were keenly appreciated and will be read by all
interested in the tragic events occurring in the Champlain valley
during the period of its French occupancy. His touching tribute
to Marquis de Montcalm, his graceful expressions of the warmth of
the friendship existing between the people of France and those of
America and his profound appreciation of the generous impulses of
the people of New York and Vermont in projecting and carrying to
a successful conclusion this commemorative celebration, in which
Samuel Champlain was the central figure, will long be remembered.
His long residence at Washington as the Ambassador Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of France, his deep
interest in American institutions and in American history, and his
wide and favorable acquaintance with the people of this country
have ingratiated him in their affections, until they have become
accustomed to look upon the distinguished French Ambassador as a
member of the official circle of the nation.

The profound and illuminating addresses of the Rt. Hon. James Bryce,
the British Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary,
delivered by him at Ticonderoga, Plattsburgh and Burlington, were
full of that ripe scholarship found in all his public papers and in
such works as his “Holy Roman Empire,” “The American Commonwealth,”
“Studies in History and Jurisprudence” and in his other treatises.
They were overflowing with good will toward the people of this
country who consider Ambassador Bryce as a staunch friend of American
institutions, as evidenced in “The American Commonwealth” and in all
his public addresses.

Rarely, if ever, have there been accredited to this country by
foreign nations two Ambassadors at the same time possessing such rare
literary and diplomatic qualities as Ambassadors Jusserand and Bryce,
each of whom achieved distinction and has been honored in his own
country.

The able and instructive addresses of Hon. Rodolphe Lemieux,
Postmaster-General of Canada and Sir Lomer Gouin, Premier of the
Province of Quebec, at Plattsburgh and Burlington were replete with
historical suggestions touching the Champlain, St. Lawrence River
and Great Lake regions and conveyed to the people south of the
international boundary the good will of the people of Canada and
their gratitude at the efforts being put forth to commemorate the
life, the character and achievements of Samuel Champlain, who founded
Quebec, the oldest city in the Dominion. There breathed through
these the spirit of good will and genuine appreciation for what was
being done in this celebration. The Canadian visitors created a most
favorable impression and on their departure left many warm friends
behind.

By a fortunate coincidence, Vice-Admiral of the Japanese Navy, Baron
Stakichi Uriu, was visiting this country during the period of the
Tercentenary Celebration and was one of the invited guests of the New
York Commission. He spoke briefly at Ticonderoga and since his return
to Japan has conveyed to the Commission his appreciation of the honor
conferred upon him in being permitted to witness the Tercentenary
Celebration and at receiving the official Report containing a record
of it.

The addresses of these representatives of Foreign Governments
were entertaining and valuable contributions to the Tercentenary
Exercises, giving them an international character exponential of
events to be commemorated in tracing the history of the discovery
of the lake and the subsequent control of the territory by three
successful sovereign nations.

The Commission takes this occasion to acknowledge its obligations in
this respect to the distinguished visitors and Foreign Governments,
which they severally represented, for their assistance and
co-operation in giving the Tercentenary Celebration its international
character and some of its most charming features.

We cannot close this report without again expressing our grateful
appreciation to the people of France for their thoughtfulness and
generosity in sending to this country a work of art by one of their
most distinguished sculptors, to embellish the Memorial Lighthouse
erected by the States of New York and Vermont to commemorate the life
of Samuel Champlain. It was a delicate and beautiful expression of
appreciation on the part of the leaders of thought and culture in our
sister Republic across the sea to present a bust of such symbolism
as “La France” as the seal of their approval of our efforts in this
regard.

As far as we have been able to do so, we have preserved in this
report the addresses of M. Hanotaux and others, as well as some
of their reports on their return to Paris, embodying their views
and expressing their feelings toward the people of this nation,
which throw new light on the sympathetic character and generous
impulses of the French people. The coming of a delegation of so many
distinguished Frenchmen was a great compliment to the people of this
nation. This in itself was a testimonial of good will, appreciated
fully as keenly as the work of art. The people of the Champlain
valley and elsewhere will not be likely to forget the fact that in
addition to the distinguished line of great Frenchmen from Champlain
to Ambassador Jusserand, who have visited the Champlain valley,
there came to that valley in the month of May, 1912, a delegation of
the most distinguished Frenchmen representing industry, commerce,
science, literature and art, as well as civil and military affairs,
jurisprudence, statesmanship and diplomacy, that ever visited this
country. They came to place the seal of France upon the Crown Point
Memorial Lighthouse to Samuel Champlain, and to convey to the people
of this country the appreciation of the French Nation for what was
being done to commemorate the life and character of one of their
countrymen. The names of this delegation have already appeared, but
let record be herein made of the fact that Fernand Cormon, member of
the Institute and President of the Academy of Fine Arts, was one of
the delegation that brought the Rodin allegorical bust from France
and directed its location on the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse.

The President of the United States, William Howard Taft, Governor
Charles E. Hughes, Governor George H. Prouty, Secretary of War Jacob
M. Dickinson, Senator Elihu Root, Congressmen George R. Malby, David
J. Foster, Frank Plumley and the other speakers, the poets and the
clergymen who participated in the Celebration as well as Governor
John A. Dix of New York and Governor John A. Mead of Vermont and
other speakers and clergymen, who took part in the dedication of
the two Champlain memorials, not only put the members of the two
Champlain Commissions, but the people of the Champlain valley under
obligations to them for their contributions to the excellence and
high quality of the literary exercises.

Col. Calvin D. Cowles and staff of officers and the Fifth U. S.
Infantry; Col. William Paulding and staff of officers and the
Twenty-fourth U. S. Infantry; Captain William T. Littebrant and staff
of officers and the Fifteenth U. S. Cavalry; Brigadier-General J.
H. Lloyd and staff of officers of the Third Brigade of the National
Guard, New York; Col. James W. Lester and staff of officers and
enlisted men of the Second Regiment of the National Guard, New York;
Col. John I. Pruyn and staff of officers and enlisted men of the
Tenth Infantry of the National Guard, New York; and the Canadian
Military Organizations heretofore referred to and the Flotilla,
comprising the torpedo boat _Manley_ and two steam cutters named
_Plattsburgh_ and _Burlington_, respectively, under command of Lieut.
G. W. Steele, Jr., with Midshipman Gerard Bradford second in command,
and L. O. Armstrong, with his company of 150 Indians, descendants
of the tribes originally occupying the Champlain valley, were
important factors in the military, naval and pageant features of the
Tercentenary Celebration contributing materially to its success. The
maneuvering of these troops in the Champlain valley was suggestive of
the military expeditions and fierce engagements that characterized
its history for nearly two hundred years after the discovery of the
lake by Samuel Champlain.

This Commission takes this occasion to acknowledge its obligations
in this direction to the commissioned and other officers and
members of these various military organizations as well as to the
Brigadier-General, Major-General and other officers and members of
the National Guard of New York, who took part in the celebration and
in the dedicatory ceremonies of the two memorials in July, 1912.

The Commission is also grateful to Hon. Robert Bacon, former
Ambassador to France, to Paul Fuller, Jr., Secretary of
Franco-American Committee, to Hon. Frank S. Witherbee, President and
to the members of the Lake Champlain Association, to President John
H. Finley of the College of the City of New York, to Hon. McDougall
Hawkes, Chairman of the American Board of the French Institute in
the United States, to Hon. Charles B. Alexander, to former Senator
William A. Clark of New York, to Hon. A. Barton Hepburn, President of
the Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York and to all others,
who assisted in the entertainment of the French Delegation on their
visit to this country in April-May, 1912.

Acknowledgment is also made of the entertainment of the members of
the Preliminary Champlain Commission by the Hon. and Mrs. Nelson W.
Fisk at their home at Isle La Motte on September 7, 1907, and of the
transportation of the members of that Commission on the _Valcour_,
owned by Hon. Joseph C. Sibley, to Burlington in the afternoon of
that day, where they were entertained by the Ethan Allen Club in the
evening. Representative Sibley also placed his yacht, _Valcour_, at
the disposition of the Commission during the week of the Celebration.

It will also be remembered that Mr. and Mrs. Stephen H. P. Pell
entertained President Taft and other distinguished guests at their
home at Ticonderoga on July 6, 1909, and also the French delegation
on May 3, 1912.

Commissioner and Mrs. Walter C. Witherbee entertained members of the
Commission at their beautiful home at Port Henry on July 5, 1909.

Through the courtesy of Col. Robert M. Thompson, accommodations were
provided by him for entertainment of members of the Commission at
Ticonderoga on July 5 and 6, 1909.

Commissioner Howland Pell entertained the members of the Commission
at his reconstructed Germain Redoubt at Ticonderoga on May 3, 1909.

Hon. John R. Myers of Rouse’s Point supervised the transportation of
the participants in the Indian pageants during the celebration and in
other ways aided the Commission in its labors.

Frank H. Severance, secretary of the Buffalo Historical Society, was
secretary of the Preliminary Lake Champlain Commission and prepared
two historical papers, which appeared in the First Report of this
Commission. In these respects and otherwise he rendered important
services to this Commission.

The Notes on the Archæology of the Champlain valley, contained in the
Appendix of this volume, by Prof. George H. Perkins, Ph.D., state
geologist of Vermont, is a valuable contribution to this Report and
is gratefully appreciated by the members of this Commission.

The typographical excellence of the First Report of this Commission
elicited general commendation and the State Printers, J. B. Lyon
Company of Albany, New York, have spared no pains in the presswork of
this Final Report to insure its general excellence.

The exhaustive analytical Index to the First Report and also that to
the Final Report, prepared by Charles Alexander Nelson, A. M., will
greatly facilitate their usefulness for historical and other purposes.

The members of the Commission were among the invited guests of the
Hudson-Fulton Commission during that memorable celebration.

All these were gratefully appreciated as well as all other things
done and courtesies shown to the Commission by the people of the
Champlain valley in their enthusiastic support of the project of
suitably celebrating the discovery of the lake.

In concluding their work, the Commissioners take this occasion to
express their appreciation of the generous support and wide publicity
given to the Tercentenary project by the Press of this Country and of
Canada, which contributed much to the popular interest shown in this
commemorative celebration.




III. HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TERCENTENARY CELEBRATION


If the Tercentenary Celebration has awakened a deeper popular
interest in the history of the Champlain valley, and as a result of
that a broader and more profound appreciation of the principles of
civil and religious liberty underlying our American institutions,
and of the heroic sacrifices made by the founders of this government
to insure its perpetuity, then the members of the Commission and the
people of the state may feel well repaid for all efforts put forth in
its prosecution.

In the various papers and addresses of the celebration frequent
allusion was made to the important events occurring in the several
epochs of the history of Lake Champlain, and many of these were
elaborated upon at some length. It was not possible, however, to do
more.

The critical history of the Champlain valley is yet to be written.
For three centuries it has been the arena wherein have occurred many
crucial events affecting the evolution and the character of American
institutions.

Ira Allen in his “Natural and Political History of the State of
Vermont,” Francis Parkman in his various historical works, Hon.
Lucius E. Chittenden in his addresses and public papers, Peter S.
Palmer in his “History of Lake Champlain,” and in his “History of
the Battle of Valcour on Lake Champlain,” Winslow C. Watson in his
“History of Essex County,” his “Pioneer History of the Champlain
Valley” and his “Men and Times of the Revolution,” Thomas Hawley
Canfield in his “Discovery, Navigation and Navigators of Lake
Champlain,” Zadock Thompson in his histories of the State of Vermont
and in his “Northern Guide,” Hiland Hall in his “History of Vermont,”
Winslow C. Watson in his “Military and Political History of Essex
County,” [N. Y.] in the “History of Essex County,” [N. Y.] by H. P.
Smith, in the papers entitled “The First Battle of Lake Champlain,”
by George F. Bixby, Rev. Joseph Cook in his “Historical Address at
the Centennial Anniversary of the Settlement of Ticonderoga,” and in
other addresses and writings, Walter H. Crockett in his “History
of Lake Champlain,” and others, have given much of the history of
the successive periods, although the works of some of these are
necessarily too limited to include a complete history of the region
in all its amplitude and in all its details.

In the papers and proceedings of the Vermont Historical Society, as
well as in the “Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the
State of New York” and the “Documentary History of the State of New
York,” and in other transcripts of documents in foreign and American
archives, and in the Military Records of the United States, France,
Great Britain and Canada may be found much material relating to the
history of Lake Champlain. There will be found in such libraries as
the State Library at Albany, the State Library at Montpelier, the
library of the Ticonderoga Historical Society, the libraries at Port
Henry and at Plattsburgh, as well as in the library at Middlebury
College and in the library of the University of Vermont, at
Burlington, Vt., in the Collections of the New York State Historical
Association, the New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island
and other State Historical Societies, and in the libraries of Ottawa,
Montreal and Quebec, maps, charts, documents and other material
relating to the region. The foreign material is confined principally
to events occurring prior to 1783, except such British and Canadian
documents as relate to the War of 1812.

The correspondence between the Colonial Governors and military and
naval officers in America, including General Jeffrey Amherst and
General John Burgoyne, with William Pitt and other representatives of
the home government, throws much light on the events of the British
period from 1758 to 1783. Other historical writings and standard
histories may also be consulted with profit.

Since the conclusion of the War of 1812 the history of the Champlain
valley has been that of a record of the settlement, the agricultural
and mineral development of the territory bordering on the lake, and
of an active transportation and commercial business done on the
lake until the construction of railroads paralleling it on either
side, which checked the volume of transportation by water as well
as the active passenger service that had been done by steamers for
three-quarters of a century. The completion of the barge canal
between the Hudson and Lake Champlain may to some extent restore the
volume of transportation on the lake.

From pre-historic times the Champlain valley has been one of the
thoroughfares of successive nations occupying the region, inviting
alike to discoverer, trader, pioneer, warrior and traveler. It was
but natural that its circumjacent shores and beautiful islands should
become the homes of sturdy men, breathing the ozone of the mountain
air wafted down into the valley, and possessing an independence and
resolution found in such men as the Allens, the Warrens, the Bakers,
and the Chittendens. It was this spirit which moved Ira Allen to
incorporate in the first constitution of Vermont, adopted July 2 to
8, 1777, a mandatory provision providing for a common school in each
town, a grammar school in each county, and a university in the state,
and afterward he gave all his property to found the University of
Vermont.

The conditions obtaining in the Champlain valley during the
Tercentenary Celebration were thus picturesquely but aptly described
by Dr. Hamilton Wright Mabie, the Tercentenary orator at Ticonderoga,
in the Outlook of July 31, 1909:

  * * * Never were conditions more favorable for such a celebration
  as that planned in honor of Champlain’s discovery. Barring one day,
  the weather was perfect. Refreshing breezes swept through the gaps
  between the soft blue domes on either side of the lake, tempering
  the ardor of the sun’s rays, while the air was of that crystalline
  clarity, which exhilarates and draws from man involuntary
  exclamations of gladness for the fact of mere existence. Each day
  a pageant of great, snowy clouds swept across the deep blue sky,
  adding to the dreamy charm of the background of the celebration.
  The spectator’s manipulation of the pigments of language is not
  so perfect as was Turner’s of paints; but he wishes it were, in
  order that he might convey an impression of the changing lights
  and shadows and tints, which presented new combinations of color
  with every passing moment. From the moment the rays of the rising
  sun shot through the notches in the Green Mountains, informing the
  visitor that he or she must be up and doing if the event of the
  day was to be witnessed, until the golden afterglow had ceased to
  define the rounded heights of the Adirondacks and the amethystine
  tints of the mountain sides had deepened into the black shadow of
  night, each hour had a fresh temptation for the artist.




IV. REPRESENTATIVE MEN OF THE CHAMPLAIN REGION


Out from that valley have come a host of statesmen: Stephen A.
Douglas, Samuel Prentice, Solomon Foote, Silas Wright, Samuel S.
Phelps, Jacob Collamer, Robert S. Hale, William A. Wheeler, Chester
A. Arthur, George F. Edmunds, John M. Thurston, born at Montpelier,
August 21, 1847, and U. S. Senator from Nebraska, 1895 to 1901;
Matthew H. Carpenter, born at Moretown, December 22, 1824, U. S.
Senator from Wisconsin, 1869 to 1875, and from 1879 to February
25, 1881; Jacob M. Howard, born at Shaftsbury, July 10, 1805,
representative in Congress from Michigan from 1841 to 1843 and U.
S. Senator from 1862 to 1871; William Pitt Kellogg, born at Orwell,
December 8, 1831, U. S. Senator from Louisiana, 1868 to 1874; Leslie
M. Shaw, born at Morristown, Vt., November 2, 1848, Governor of
Iowa in 1898 to 1902, and became Secretary of U. S. Treasury on
February 1, 1902, under President Theodore Roosevelt; Alexander
W. Buel, born in Rutland in 1813, representative from Michigan in
Congress from 1849 to 1850; Selucius Garfielde, born at Shoreham,
December 8, 1822, and representative from Washington Territory in
the 41st and 42d Congresses; Josiah B. Grinnell, born at New Haven,
December 22, 1821, and representative from Iowa in the 38th Congress;
Joseph Ketchum Edgerton, born in Vergennes, February 16, 1818, and
representative from Indiana in the 38th Congress; J. Allen Barber,
born at Georgia, Vt., member of the first Constitutional Convention
of Wisconsin and representative from Wisconsin in the 42d and 43d
Congresses; Lucien B. Caswell, born at Swanton, Vt., representative
from Wisconsin in the 44th-47th Congresses; Joel Turrel, born at
Shoreham, Vt., February 22, 1794, and representative from New York in
Congress from 1833 to 1837; John Fassett Follett, born in Franklin
County, Vt., and representative from Ohio in 48th Congress; Stephen
C. Millard, born at Stamford, January 14, 1841, representative
from New York in the 48th and 49th Congresses; John M. Parker, born
at Granville, N. Y., June 14, 1805, and representative in Congress
from 1855-9; Aaron F. Perry, born at Leicester, Vt., January 1,
1815, representative from Ohio in 42d Congress; Ossian Ray, born
at Hinesburgh, Vt., December 13, 1815, and representative from New
Hampshire in the 46th and 47th Congresses; Almon H. Read, born at
Shelburne, Vt., June 12, 1790, representative from Pennsylvania in
Congress from 1842-1844; John Gilbert Sawyer, born at Brandon, Vt.,
June 5, 1825, and a representative from New York in the 49th and 50th
Congresses; Philetus Sawyer, who spent his youth in the Adirondacks,
was a representative from Wisconsin in the 39th and ten succeeding
Congresses, and in 1881 elected to the United States Senate and
re-elected in 1887, where he served with great distinction; George
Willard, born at Bolton, Vt., March 20, 1824, and a representative
from Michigan in 43d and 44th Congresses; Joseph W. Babcock, born at
Swanton, Vt., March 6, 1850, and representative from Wisconsin in
the 53d to the 60th Congresses; Martin J. Wade, born at Burlington,
Vt., October 20, 1861, and representative from Iowa in the 58th
Congress; George Edmund Foss, born at Berkshire, Vt., July 2, 1863, a
representative from Illinois in the 54th to 62d Congresses; Eugene N.
Foss, born at West Berkshire, Vt., September 24, 1858, representative
from Massachusetts in Congress in 1910, and Governor of Massachusetts
since 1910, and such diplomats as John A. Kasson, George P. Marsh,
Levi P. Morton, Edward J. Phelps, and such journalists as James R.
Spalding, founder of the New York _World_, Jeremiah Evarts, father of
William M. Evarts, and scores of others. Some of these, however, were
not born in the valley, but they received their early impressions
from conditions existing there, while attending college or spending
their youth in that invigorating atmosphere. Among such was Henry J.
Raymond, who took his course at the University of Vermont, and became
founder of the New York _Times_ and representative in Congress during
the Lincoln administration.

In the Congressional representation of the Champlain valley
occur the names of many distinguished citizens: Peter Sailly of
Plattsburgh, representative in Congress in 1804, who enjoyed the
confidence of President Thomas Jefferson and who appealed to the
Secretary of the Treasury in August, 1813, to prevent the further
destruction of property on the west side of the lake, where, he
said, “there is not a military post nor a soldier to be seen”; Hon.
Reuben H. Walworth of Plattsburgh, representative in Congress in
1821-1823 and Chancellor for the State from 1828 to 1848; General
Henry H. Ross of Essex, representative in the 19th Congress and on
General Macomb’s staff at the battle of Plattsburgh; Hon. Augustus
C. Hand of Elizabethtown, representative in Congress in 1839-1840;
Hon. William Slade of Middlebury, representative in Congress from
1831 to 1843; Hon. Lemuel Stetson of Plattsburgh, representative in
the 28th Congress and later County Judge of Clinton County; Hon.
Orlando Kellogg of Elizabethtown, a representative in the 30th, 38th
and 39th Congresses, and an intimate friend of President Lincoln;
George R. Andrews of Ticonderoga, representative in Congress,
1849-1850, and later Justice of the Supreme Court; George A. Simmons
of Keeseville, one of the most eminent lawyers in the State at that
time and representative in Congress in 1853-1855; Hon. Frederick
E. Woodbridge of Vergennes, representative in Congress for several
terms; Hon. Robert S. Hale of Elizabethtown, N. Y., representative
in Congress in 1865; Hon. George W. Palmer of Plattsburgh,
representative in the 35th and 36th Congresses; Judge Homer E.
Royce of St. Albans, Vt., representative in Congress and later
Chief Judge of the Supreme Court of Vermont; Hon. John W. Stewart
of Middlebury, Vt., representative in Congress and United States
Senator; Hon. Henry G. Burleigh, representative in the 48th and 49th
Congresses; Judge Horace Henry Powers of Morrisville, Vt., Chief
Judge of the Supreme Court of Vermont and representative in Congress
from 1890 to 1900; John H. Moffit of Plattsburgh, representative in
the 50th and 51st Congresses; Hon. John M. Wever of Plattsburgh,
representative in the 52d and 53d Congresses; Hon. Wallace T. Foote,
Jr. of Port Henry, representative in the 54th and 55th Congresses;
Richard Keese, representative in the 20th Congress; Orange Ferris,
representative in the 40th Congress; John Rogers, representative in
the 42d Congress; John Hammond, representative in the 46th and 47th
Congresses; Roswell G. Horr, representative in the 46th, 47th and
48th Congresses; and others.

Honorable Azariah C. Flagg of Plattsburgh was Secretary of State in
1826, and State Comptroller in 1834, and Hon. John F. O’Brien of
Plattsburgh was Secretary of State from 1903 to 1907.

Hon. St. John B. L. Skinner of Clinton County was Postmaster-General
under Andrew Johnson.

Among the early settlers, who located in Plattsburgh, were Judge
Zephaniah Platt, formerly of Poughkeepsie, member of the first
Provincial Congress of New York and a member of the Convention
called to consider the Federal Constitution and the advisability
of its adoption; Judge Melancton Smith, a native of Queens County,
member of the First Provincial Congress of New York from Dutchess
County and an opponent of Hamilton and Livingston in the Convention
called to consider the advisability of the ratification of the
Federal Constitution; and Judge Thomas Treadwell, a member of the
First Provincial Congress of New York and of the Convention called
to formulate the First State Constitution, who was also a member of
the Convention called to consider the Federal Constitution and the
advisability of its adoption.

In a later period, it will be remembered that Hon. Matthew Hale, Hon.
Francis Lynde Stetson, Hon. John I. Gilbert, Hon. Richard L. Hand,
and others were natives of the Champlain valley.

Many judges have been natives of the Champlain valley. Some of them
have served in the courts of Vermont and New York, but more have
become residents of other states, and there filled judicial positions
in the state and Federal Courts. It would be interesting to record
the names of all such judges who had their birth in the Champlain
valley, if space permitted. We must content ourselves, however, with
giving the names of a few. The first of these to occur to one is
Samuel Nelson, born at Hebron, N. Y., November 10, 1792, who was a
member of the State Constitutional Conventions of 1821 and 1846, a
Justice of the Supreme Court of New York from 1831 to 1845, and a
Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1845 to 1872,
one of the longest judicial tenures ever held by a judge in this
country.

The following may also be mentioned: Chancellor Reuben H. Walworth,
Samuel Hand, Judge of the Court of Appeals, Judges, John C.
Churchill, William Sweetland, John Lynde, Charles Henry Phelps,
Aldace F. Walker, Wheelock G. Veazey, William P. Kellogg, Henry
Chipman, Pliny Moore, John M. Parker, George Martin, Mark Skinner,
Charles L. Benedict, John Alexander Jameson, Melville A. Sheldon,
Eugene E. Sheldon, Walter C. Dunton, Perry G. Ellsworth, Joseph
Potter, S. Alonzo Kellogg, Chester B. McLaughlin, Winslow C. Watson,
Albert C. Barnes, Henry T. Kellogg, Jesse Walker, Thomas H. Noonan,
John H. Booth, and John B. Riley.

Only a few of the lawyers, who were natives of the Champlain valley,
can be mentioned out of the great number that have gone forth to take
up their residences elsewhere. Many of them have located in New York
and other Atlantic states, although a goodly number have located in
the Central and Western states, and are among the persons heretofore
mentioned as holding, or who have held official positions.

In addition to such, however, may also be mentioned George L. Clarke,
Hon. Smith M. Weed, Hon. George M. Beckwith, Hon. Robert D. Benedict,
Hon. Thomas F. Conway, Elroy N. Clark, Charles W. Waterman, George
Murray Wright, John C. Clark, Hon. John J. Allen, James M. Gifford,
William L. G. Smith, Hon. Benjamin E. Hall, Charles E. Shaw, James
B. Ross, Hon. Henry W. Hill, member of the New York Constitutional
Convention of 1894 and State Senator from 1901 to 1911, Julius H.
Seymour, George W. Alger, Adelbert W. Boynton, Hon. Daniel Roberts,
Charles C. Farnham, Samuel B. Botsford, Harold J. Adams, Hon. Lucian
L. Shedden, Oliver D. Barrett, Rome G. Brown and Charles F. Blair.

Among the natives of the Champlain valley who entered the Army and
Navy during the Civil War and since that time were Gen’l Wm. F.
Smith, Gen’l George J. Stannard, Gen’l William Wells, Col. Frank
Palmer, Col. George F. Nichols, Lieut. Matthew M. Standish, Gen’l
Stephen Moffitt, Col. John Hammond, Rear-Admiral John W. Moore,
Commodore A. V. Wadhams, Admiral George Dewey, and many others, who
maintained the high standards of efficiency and bravery exhibited
by those who a century earlier participated in the engagements at
Ticonderoga, Bennington and Saratoga, and in the naval engagements of
Valcour and Plattsburgh Bay.

In addition to those already named, there have come from the
Champlain valley many to fill positions of responsibility in the
state and nation, of whom only the following few need be mentioned,
viz., Loyal L. Smith the philanthropist, Hon. John H. Converse,
President of the Baldwin Locomotive Works, Thomas Waterman Wood,
President of the National Academy of Design in 1891, Hon. Stephen
A. Walker, at one time Commissioner of the Board of Education of
the State of New York, Hon. Darwin P. Kingsley, President of the
New York Life Insurance Company, the late Dr. Abel Mix Phelps, the
orthopedic surgeon, Henry H. Vail, publisher of school books, Samuel
Sheldon, expert in electric science, Charles F. Longworth, expert in
food products, Augustus Torrey, chief engineer of M. C. R. R., Rt.
Rev. Bishop Edgar P. Wadhams of Ogdensburg, Rev. Byron Sunderland
of Washington, D. C., the late Rev. Constans Liberty Goodell, D. D.
of St. Louis, Mo., Rev. George F. Herrick, D. D., author of many
Biblical works, located in Constantinople, Rev. George F. Hunting,
D. D., President of Alma College, author of many papers and poems,
Rev. George B. Spalding, President William Nelson Ferrin of Pacific
University, Prof. Warren H. Landon, the late Prof. Walter E. Howard,
Prof. John Dewey of Columbia University, Prof. Davis R. Dewey of
Boston, Prof. Frank E. Woodruff of Bowdoin College, the Hon. Edwin
Ferry Johnson, civil engineer and educator, James R. Chapman, General
Manager of the Metropolitan District Electric Traction Company of
London, England, Charles A. Catlin, expert in chemistry, and others.

Among the prominent educators of the Champlain valley have been
Presidents James Marsh, Joseph Torrey and Matthew H. Buckham, all
of the University of Vermont; Presidents Benjamin Larabee, Ezra
Brainerd and John M. Thomas, all of Middlebury College, Captain
John Alden Patridge, and Presidents Allen Danvers Brown and Charles
Horace Spooner, all of Norwich University. These were and are
representatives of the higher culture of its educational institutions.

There have also been many noted and learned professors, filling their
respective chairs in these educational institutions since their
foundation, with distinction. These institutions have maintained
educational standards so high that they have exerted a marked
influence on the culture and refinement of people residing in and
outside of the valley. Other educational institutions have also made
their influence felt on students coming from the Champlain valley,
as well as on their graduates returning to it, thereby contributing
materially to the intellectual uplift of the people of the territory.
All this is evidenced by the large number of liberally educated men
and women who have gone forth to fill civic, technical, professional,
political and other positions with marked ability, in various parts
of the country.

Representatives of the Champlain valley are found in the Army, the
Navy and in all departments of the national Government, as well as in
the various state governments. They will also be found in the learned
professions, in commercial, technical, engineering, mechanical and
electrical pursuits, and are thus spreading abroad the professional,
technical and general information, which they have received in the
institutions of the Champlain valley and in the institutions outside
of the Champlain valley, which they attended.

If space permitted, it might be of interest to submit a bibliography
of the works of the authors, who have at various times lived in the
Champlain valley. A few only need be cited to show their character
and scope.

In addition to his services as a civilian and a Major-General of the
State Militia, Ira Allen wrote the “National and Political History of
the State of Vermont,” and many state papers, wherein were treated
matters in controversy between the State of New York and the people
under the New Hampshire grants.

The state papers of Governor George Clinton of New York, and
Governor Thomas Chittenden of Vermont, in relation to matters in
dispute between New York and Vermont, and the correspondence between
Nathaniel Chipman and Alexander Hamilton in relation to the boundary
dispute, and the speech of Alexander Hamilton before a committee of
the Assembly in relation to the same matter, and the controversy as
to the boundary line between the two states, and other matters of
interest to both commonwealths, form a most important chapter in the
early history of the two states, and are contained in the Documentary
History of New York and the publications of the Vermont Historical
Society.

As an evidence of the intellectual and moral culture of the people
of the Champlain valley, attention is called to the writings of
James Marsh, President of the University of Vermont, including his
Preliminary Essay to Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s “Aids to Reflection.”

Dr. Joseph Torrey, President of the University of Vermont, read an
important paper on “The Discovery and Occupation of Lake Champlain,”
before the Vermont Historical Society, on October 16, 1860, and he
also wrote a work, which had an extensive sale, known as “A Theory
of Fine Art,” but he is widely known as the translator of Neander’s
“General History of the Christian Religion and Church.”

The works of George P. Marsh, for many years United States Minister
to Turkey and Italy, include “Lectures on the English Language,”
published in 1861, “The Origin and History of the English Language,”
published in 1862, “The Earth as Modified by Human Action,” published
in 1874, some of which were standard treatises.

Judge Edmund Hatch Bennett was the author of an edition of the works
of Judge Joseph Story and also of an hundred volumes of law reports.

Rev. William G. T. Shedd, lecturer at the University of Vermont, was
a prolific writer on historical, philosophical and literary subjects,
and his works became standard authorities on the subjects treated.

Thomas Jefferson Conant of Middlebury, born at Brandon, Vt., and a
graduate of Middlebury College, was the author of various Biblical
works, and a member of the American Bible Revision Committee.

Rev. John B. Wentworth, D. D., was the author of “The Logic of
Introspection,” and “The Philosophy of Methodism.”

Rev. George N. Boardman, graduate of Middlebury College, was the
author of the “History of New England Theology.”

Samuel Ward Boardman, of Middlebury College, was the author of
“Arbitration” and other works.

Rev. Charles Marsh Mead, a graduate of Middlebury College, was the
author of several works, and a member of the American Bible Revision
Committee.

Prof. John E. Goodrich, D. D., of the University of Vermont, is the
author of several historical papers, including a volume entitled
“Vermont Revolutionary Rolls,” and parts of the Standard Dictionary
and other publications.

Col. George Grenville Benedict of Burlington, President of the
Vermont Historical Society, was the author of “Vermont in the Civil
War” in two volumes, and “Vermont at Gettysburg,” and “Army Life in
Virginia.”

Prof. George H. Perkins of the University of Vermont is the author
of several works and reports on the Geology of Vermont and the
archaeology of the Lake Champlain region.

Prof. Brainard Kellogg, formerly of Middlebury College, is the author
of several school and college text books.

A recent work is “Three Centuries in Champlain Valley,” by Mrs.
George Fuller Tuttle of Plattsburgh, Regent of Saranac Chapter,
Daughters of American Revolution.

Several works have heretofore been cited in this report relating to
the history of Lake Champlain, by persons residing in the valley
and deeply interested in its history. All these will be carefully
examined by students and writers of the events occurring in the
Champlain valley.

Among the poets of the valley is John G. Saxe, born at Highgate, Vt.,
June 2, 1816, a graduate of Middlebury College in 1839. It has been
said of him that he was second only to Dr. Holmes as a humorist.

Lucretia Maria Davidson of Plattsburgh, a promising poetess, died at
an early age, in 1825.

For many years Julia Ward Howe, born in New York, resided in Rutland
county, and wrote poetry. Her principal poem is the “Battle Hymn of
the Republic.”

Rev. Orville G. Wheeler, born at Charlotte, Vt., resided in Grand
Isle county, and wrote poems occasionally, the principal one of which
is his Semi-Centennial Poem of the University of Vermont, read in
1854.

Daniel L. Cady, L.H.D., a graduate of the University of Vermont in
the class of 1886, was the poet at the Tercentenary Exercises at
Plattsburgh, and his poem entitled “Champlain and Lake Champlain” is
an Epic of the Champlain valley.

Prof. Davis R. Dewey is the author of a work and several papers on
Economics and kindred subjects, and has done much in that field of
political science.

Prof. John Dewey is the author of one or more works on Psychology,
and is one of the leading authorities in this country on
philosophical subjects.

Rev. George F. Wright, D. D., born in Whitehall, is the author of
many works, including the annual publications known as “Records of
the Past.” He is also the author of “Logic of Christian Evidences,”
and works on geological and archæological subjects.

Rev. Joseph Cook, born at Ticonderoga in 1838, after pursuing his
studies in American and German universities, delivered several
courses of lectures in Boston, New York and elsewhere, on current
topics and on such subjects as “Transcendentalism,” “Orthodoxy,”
etc., with such clearness and force as to arouse deep interest in
them, notwithstanding their abstruseness. His lectures were published
in book form and widely read. His noted “Centennial Address” at
Ticonderoga on July 25, 1864, is a valuable contribution to the
history of Lake Champlain, in which he took a deep interest. In
some respects he was one of the best informed living writers on the
subject at the time of his death.

The Hon. Lucius E. Chittenden, born in Williston, Vt., May 24, 1824,
who became Register of the United States Treasury under President
Lincoln, collected a valuable library relating to the history
of Lake Champlain, and delivered the annual address before the
Vermont Historical Society on October 8, 1872, on the “Capture of
Ticonderoga.” He is also the author of “Recollections of President
Lincoln and his Administration,” and other works.

Henry W. Hill, President of the Buffalo Historical Society, a
native of Isle La Motte, Vt., one of the first points visited
by Samuel Champlain in the valley, is the author of “Waterways
and Canal Construction in New York State,” of “The Development
of Constitutional Law in the State of New York,” the framer of
several constitutional provisions of New York, a contributor to the
Bibliophile edition of the works of Horace, the author of several
articles in encyclopaedias and the compiler and editor of the Reports
of the New York Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission.

Hon. Robert Roberts of Burlington, Vermont, is the author of the
valuable Digest of the Vermont Reports.

Charles W. Baker is the author of “Monopolies and the People” and
editor of the _Engineering News_, New York City.

Moses Nelson Baker is the author of books, papers and numerous
articles on engineering, sanitation, and economic subjects, and
associate editor of the _Engineering News_, New York City.

Kirby Flower Smith, Ph.D., a native of Rutland county, Vermont, a
graduate of the University of Vermont in 1884, is the Dean of the
Latin Faculty of Johns Hopkins University and is the author of
several articles, books and papers on various phases of the Latin
language and the literature of the Romans. He is one of the leading
authorities of America in this domain of classical literature.

Henry Norman Hudson of Cornwall, Vt., a graduate of Middlebury
college, was one of the principal Shakspearian scholars in the United
States at the time of his death in 1886.

One of the more recent contributors to the literature of the
Champlain region was the late Robert O. Bascom of Fort Edward.
A bibliography of his papers may be found in the New York State
Historical Association Publications, vol. 10, p. 301.

Frederick B. Richards, Secretary of the New York State Historical
Association, Hon. James A. Holden, State Historian, Victor Hugo
Paltsits, former State Historian, Dr. George F. Bixby, Dr. William
A. E. Cummings, President of the Ticonderoga Historical Society,
and others, have contributed valuable papers in recent years on
different phases of the History of Lake Champlain, some of which have
been included in the publications of the New York State Historical
Association.

James Buckham, son of President Matthew H. Buckham, the essayist and
poet, whose writings possess a charm and purity of diction not unlike
those of Matthew Arnold.

Prof. James R. Wheeler, Ph.D., of Columbia University, one of the
leading authorities in this country on the Greek language, archæology
and art.

Bert Hodge Hill, Ph.D., of Bristol, Vt., is Director of American
School of Classical Studies at Athens, Greece.

Rev. Earl M. Wilbur, a graduate of the University of Vermont, is Dean
of the Pacific Unitarian School at Berkeley, Cal.

These are a few of the native authors and writers of the Champlain
valley, and the list might be extended, if space permitted.

Others might be cited, but the foregoing will suffice to show the
trend of thought in the Champlain valley and that it has been quite
as productive of men of noble culture as any other part of the
country. This may have been lost sight of in the attention given
to its more spectacular and thrilling military and naval history.
But for a century past, the amenities of peace and the fruition of
high ideals have accelerated its intellectual and moral uplift and
contributed to that general culture which has long prevailed in the
Champlain valley.

Its residents are for the most part well-trained, thoughtful,
cultured people. They thoroughly appreciated the Tercentenary
exercises, as well as the dedicatory ceremonies. The social as well
as the atmospheric conditions there are wholesome and invigorating,
consequently it is fast becoming the resort during the summer months
of the people from the metropolis and other cities, seeking rest and
recreation under conditions that are healthful and inspiring. The
Tercentenary celebration brought its advantages to the attention of a
large portion of our population, who may find in the Champlain valley
such resorts as they need for health and pleasure.

[Illustration: NEW YORK COMMISSIONERS

HENRY W. HILL

WALTER C. WITHERBEE

H. WALLACE KNAPP

JAMES J. FRAWLEY

JAMES A. FOLEY]

[Illustration: NEW YORK COMMISSIONERS

JOHN B. RILEY

LOUIS C. LAFONTAINE

HOWLAND PELL

JOHN H. BOOTH

JAMES SHEA

WILLIAM R. WEAVER]




V. CONCLUSION OF THE WORK OF THE NEW YORK LAKE CHAMPLAIN TERCENTENARY
COMMISSION


The work of the Commission was done largely through committees
after a presentation and consideration of such problems as arose
under instructions adopted at formal sessions of the Commission
from time to time with reference to the conduct of the celebration
and the construction of memorials. The Commission held upwards of
thirty-seven formal sessions and the results may be seen in the work
accomplished. From the first it was the purpose of the Commission to
organize and carry to a successful conclusion such a celebration as
would be in keeping with the dignity of the state and true to the
historical events to be commemorated. The members of the Commission
fully appreciate their limitations in undertaking to present in
outline the history of the Champlain valley in the form necessarily
pursued in the Tercentenary Celebration, which President Taft
humorously characterized as a “traveling show,” but there was no
other way suggested or that occurred to members of the Commission,
whereby that could be done and any adequate presentation of the
tragic events following the discovery of the lake could be made, than
that adopted by the Commission.

Though there may not have been given “the substance,” the members
trust that they may not have failed to so present its essentials
as to enable many to behold something of what Professor William
M. Sloane denominates “the vision of history,” as unfolded in the
Champlain valley.


ACTIVITIES OF THE TERCENTENARY COMMISSIONERS

The multifarious duties, devolving upon the members of Lake Champlain
Tercentenary Commission during the period of five years of its
existence, and involving activities of a wide range and great detail,
may never be fully appreciated nor even fully understood. The members
of the Commission were business and professional men actively
engaged, but they were so deeply interested in the celebration, that
they left nothing undone to ensure its success. Senator James J.
Frawley was chairman of the Finance Committee of the Senate from
1911 and also a member of another State Commission, Senator James
A. Foley, who was a member of Preliminary Champlain Commission,
took a deep interest in the project from its inception, Senator H.
Wallace Knapp, chairman, Hon. Walter C. Witherbee, treasurer, Hon.
Howland Pell, whose family has done much to restore Ft. Ticonderoga,
Hon. Louis C. Lafontaine, Judges John B. Riley and John H. Booth
and Hon. James Shea, and Hon. William R. Weaver, all freely gave
their services and as much of their time as they were able to the
Tercentenary celebration.

At the final meeting of the New York Lake Champlain Tercentenary
Commission a resolution was adopted expressing the appreciation
of its members to its secretary, Henry W. Hill, for his long and
unrequited services in preparing the comprehensive, historical and
scholarly First and Final Reports of the Commission, which possess
a literary finish and a perfection in every detail worthy the
commemorative Tercentenary celebration and the bi-state, national and
international functions involved.

In presenting their Final Report to the Legislature, the Tercentenary
Commissioners avail themselves of this opportunity to make it
a matter of record that they have had the support and active
co-operation of the several Governors and successive Legislatures of
the state in office during the life of the Commission in carrying
to a successful conclusion the celebration and in the construction
and dedication of the two permanent memorials to Samuel Champlain,
the first white man to set foot on the soil of what is now within
the confines of the state. The Government of the United States
invited and, out of an appropriation made by it for that purpose,
entertained the foreign guests. The state of Vermont contributed
its proportionate share of the general expenses and of the cost of
the joint memorial at Crown Point forts. The state of New York paid
its proportionate share of the general expenses and of the cost of
the joint memorial at Crown Point forts and the entire cost of the
Champlain memorial at Plattsburgh and the Commission has turned a
small balance back into the State Treasury, as will appear from the
Financial Statement in the Appendix of this Final Report.




Appendix




I. REPORT OF HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS


Sixtieth Congress, Second Session. House of Representatives. Report
No. 2169

TERCENTENARY CELEBRATION OF DISCOVERY OF LAKE CHAMPLAIN

February 15, 1909—Referred to the House Calendar and ordered to be
printed.

Mr. Foster, of Vermont, from the Committee on Foreign Affairs,
submitted the following report.

  [To accompany H. J. Res. 257.]

The committee on Foreign Affairs, to whom was referred House
joint resolution 257, submit the following report [taken from the
joint memorial presented to Congress by the New York and Vermont
Tercentenary Commissions in January 1909.]

In the month of November, 1906, a joint resolution for the
appointment of a commission for the celebration of the three
hundredth anniversary of the discovery of Lake Champlain was adopted
by the senate and house of representatives of the State of Vermont,
containing the recital that—

  Whereas, The discovery of Lake Champlain was an event in history
  fully as important as many others that have been recognized by
  various states as well as by the National Government; and

  Whereas, The three hundredth anniversary of such discovery will
  occur on July 4, 1909, it is hereby

  _Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives_, That this
  event should be observed in a fitting manner and bring about an
  observance commensurate with its importance, there is hereby
  provided a commission consisting of the governor, who shall be
  chairman ex-officio, and six other members to be appointed by
  the governor before January 1, 1907, one of whom shall act as
  secretary. Said commission is hereby empowered to adopt such
  measures as in its judgment may be reasonable or necessary to
  bring about the fitting observance of such event. And as the
  interests of the State of New York and of the Dominion of Canada
  are allied with those of Vermont in such observance, it is hereby
  recommended that said commission confer with the proper authorities
  of New York and Canada to ascertain what action they or either of
  them will take with Vermont in making the observance of this event
  successful and a credit to all, and that the commission report the
  result of such efforts, together with its recommendations, to the
  general assembly of 1908—

which resolution was approved by Governor Fletcher D. Proctor on
November 15, 1906; and thereafter Governor Proctor appointed as
members of such commission Walter E. Howard, of Middlebury; Horace
W. Bailey, of Newbury; R. W. McCuen, of Vergennes; Lynn M. Hays, of
Essex Junction; Walter H. Crockett, of St. Albans; M. D. McMahon,
of Burlington; and thereafter, on April 15, 1907, on motion of
Senator Henry W. Hill, of Buffalo, the senate of the State of New
York adopted the following resolution, which was concurred in by the
assembly on April 16, 1907:

  WHEREAS the discovery of Lake Champlain by Samuel
  Champlain on July 4, 1609, antedates the discovery by the whites of
  any other portion of the territory now comprising the State of New
  York, and was an event worthy of commemoration in the annals of the
  State and nation; and

  WHEREAS the State of Vermont in 1906 appointed a
  commission, consisting of the governor of that State and six other
  commissioners, to confer with commissioners to be appointed on the
  part of New York and the Dominion of Canada, to ascertain what
  action, if any, ought to be taken by such States and the Dominion
  of Canada for the observance of such tercentenary: Therefore

  _Resolved (if the Assembly concur)_, That a commission consisting
  of the governor, who shall be chairman ex-officio, two citizens to
  be designated by him, the lieutenant-governor, the speaker of the
  assembly, two senators to be designated by the lieutenant-governor,
  and two members of the assembly to be designated by the speaker, be
  appointed to represent the State of New York at such conference,
  with power to enter into negotiations with the commissioners
  representing the State of Vermont and those representing the
  Dominion of Canada for the observance of such tercentenary, and
  that such commission report the results of their negotiations,
  together with the recommendations thereon, to the legislature of
  1908.

The New York commission appointed under the foregoing resolution
consisted of Governor Charles E. Hughes, Lieutenant-Governor Lewis
Stuyvesant Chanler, Senators Henry W. Hill, John C. R. Taylor, and
Assemblyman James W. Wadsworth, jr., speaker of the assembly, Alonson
T. Dominy, James A. Foley, and Frank S. Witherbee and John H. Booth.

That commission, together with the Vermont commission, during the
summer of 1907 made a tour of Lake Champlain, held several joint
and separate meetings, and the New York commission formulated its
report and transmitted it to the New York legislature of 1908, a copy
of which is annexed hereto, in the conclusion of which report they
recommend as follows:


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF 1909.

  Your commission respectfully submit the foregoing report to the
  consideration of the legislature of New York. The anniversary
  which we desire shall be suitably observed has great significance.
  Important as it is to the student of history, it makes a wider
  and stronger appeal to that large body of our citizens whose
  forefathers fought in the wars of the Champlain region or were
  among the pioneers who transformed it from the wilderness.

  But chief of all the considerations which we urge upon your
  attention is the international character of the proposed
  celebration. The history of the Champlain Valley belongs to the
  history of three great nations, whose cordial relations we believe
  will be promoted by the suitable observance of this significant
  date.


  RECOMMENDATION.

  To that end your commission, after careful investigation, reaches
  the conclusion that the three hundredth anniversary of the
  discovery of Lake Champlain should be suitably celebrated by New
  York State; and to that end we respectfully recommend the enactment
  of the following bill.

Thereafter a bill was prepared and submitted to the legislature,
which was amended in some respects, and subsequently enacted and
became chapter 149 of the New York Laws of 1908, providing in
substance for a celebration of the tercentenary of the discovery of
Lake Champlain by Samuel Champlain in the month of July, 1609, which
celebration, by the terms of the bill, is to occur in the month of
July, 1909, at various points in the Champlain valley.

The commission appointed thereunder consisted of H. Wallace Knapp,
Mooers, N. Y., chairman; Henry W. Hill, of Buffalo, secretary; Walter
C. Witherbee, Port Henry, treasurer; James J. Frawley, New York City;
James Shea, Lake Placid; James A. Foley, New York City; John H.
Booth, Plattsburgh; John B. Riley, Plattsburgh; Louis C. Lafontaine,
Champlain; Howland Pell, New York City.

This commission was empowered under the last-mentioned statute to
enter into negotiations and co-operate with the State of Vermont,
the Government of the United States, the Dominion of Canada, and the
Province of Quebec, and either or all of them in such tercentenary
celebration, and appropriated by chapter 466 of the New York Laws of
1908 the sum of $50,000 for that purpose.

The Vermont commission made its report to the legislature of Vermont,
held in the fall of 1908, also recommending, among other things,
that a proper celebration be held in conjunction with the State of
New York, the Government of the United States, and the Dominion of
Canada, a copy of which report is annexed hereto. Subsequently the
State of Vermont made an appropriation of $25,000 to enable that
State to participate in the tercentenary celebration.

The commission appointed thereunder consisted of Governor George H.
Prouty, chairman; Lynn M. Hays, of Burlington, secretary; Walter H.
Crockett, of St. Albans; Rev. John M. Thomas, of Middlebury; Horace
W. Bailey, of Rutland; W. J. Van Patten, of Burlington; Frank L.
Fish, of Vergennes; Arthur L. Stone, of St. Johnsbury; and F. O.
Beaupre, of Burlington.

The facts warranting federal appropriation are briefly set forth
in the report of the New York and Vermont commissions, and in
amplification thereof the following additional facts are respectfully
submitted to the consideration of the President and the Congress of
the United States:

Long before its discovery by Samuel Champlain, in July, 1609, Lake
Champlain was the resort and battle ground of the savage Algonquin,
Huron, and Iroquois nations who peopled its islands and circumjacent
beautifully shaded and picturesque shores. It was a paradise for the
aborigines, whose native customs and adventurous but precarious life
were a startling revelation to such an explorer as Champlain, coming
as he did from the refinements of French life of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. Still he was hospitably received and escorted
to and through the lake, then known as “Caniaderiguarunte,” which
signifies the “gate of the country.” The lake was also known as “Mer
des Iroquois,” and traversed by the warring Indian tribes, whose
canoes formed picturesque flotillas in those early days on the blue
waters of the lake.

Had Champlain been gifted with the poetic imagination of a Homer or a
Virgil, he might have cast into an epic the story of his explorations
and discoveries, which were quite as thrilling as those of the Iliad,
the Odyssey, or the Aeneid. Other poets have dwelt upon the beauties
of this lake and have sung of the tragic events that have occurred on
its waters.

The Champlain valley is one of the historic portions of the American
Continent. Its Indian occupation was succeeded by that of the French,
and in turn by the English. From its discovery in July, 1609, to the
battle of Plattsburgh, in September, 1814, Lake Champlain was the
thoroughfare of many expeditions and the scene of many sanguinary
engagements. Noted French, British, and American officers visited
it and stopped at its forts, from Ste. Anne on the north, founded
at Isle La Motte in 1665, to St. Frédéric, founded in honor of the
French secretary of foreign affairs, Frédéric Maurepas, by Marquis de
Beauharnois, governor-general of Canada, at Crown Point in 1731, and
Fort Carillon, founded at Ticonderoga in 1766, on the south.

The grants of some of its islands and adjacent shore lands under
French seignories were the subject of a long controversy between
the French and British Governments, challenging on the one side the
consideration of such officials as Marquis de Beauharnois and others
under Louis XV and Louis XVI, and on the other side such statesmen
as Lord Dartmouth, Edmund Burke, and Sir Henry Moore under the
British Crown. But few, if any, occupations were made under French
seignorial grants, and the controversy finally ended after the Seven
Years’ French and Indian war, which terminated with the capture of
Ticonderoga and Crown Point by the British in 1759, and the later
sovereign control by the Americans during the Revolution.

The Champlain valley was the scene of important military and one
naval engagement during the Revolutionary war, and permission has
been obtained from the War Department to raise from the waters
of Lake Champlain the _Royal Savage_ at Valcour Island, the
flagship of Benedict Arnold during that engagement. The history of
Ticonderoga and Macdonough’s victory at the battle of Plattsburgh, in
September 1814, are of such national importance as to merit federal
consideration during the forthcoming celebration of the discovery of
the lake.

For two hundred years or longer the Champlain valley was the highway
between Albany on the south and Quebec on the north, through which
surged the tides of war and travel, until every prominent point and
important island in the lake was marked by some notable event worthy
of historic mention. The proposed celebration of the discovery of
the lake will commemorate some of these important events. Sewall S.
Cutting, D. D., in a poem read at the University of Vermont in 1877
thus describes some of these events. He says:

      I shift my theme, nor yet shall wander far;
      My song shall linger where my memories are.
      Dear Lake Champlain! Thou hast historic fame—
      The world accords it in thy very name.
      Not English speech these savage wilds first heard,
      Not English prows that first these waters stirred;
      Primeval forests cast their shadows dark
      On dusky forms in craft of fragile bark,
      When first the paleface from the distant sea
      Brought hither conquering cross and fleur-de-lis.
      On frowning headlands rose the forts of France—
      Around them villages, and song, and dance.
      Four generations came and passed away.
      Of treacherous peace and sanguinary fray.
      When hostile armies hostile flags unfurled.
      To wage the destiny of half the world.

No part of the United States can vie in comparison with Lake
Champlain and its environs for historic importance and the ultimate
significance of the national and international events occurring in
that valley. “Every bay and island of the lake and nearly every
foot of its shore have been the scene of some warlike movement—the
midnight foray of the predatory savage, the bloody scout of
frontier settlers, the rendezvous of armed bands, or the conflict
of contending armies.” These stirring events cover a period of
centuries—from the traditional history of the Indians to the close of
the war of 1812.

From the earliest periods of settlement in Canada, New England,
and New York the valley of Lake Champlain, both as watercourse
or highway, served as a thoroughfare by which, in hostile times,
predatory excursions were directed against both the French and
English frontiers, and over which captives were conveyed into
unenviable captivity. This was the route traversed by delegations
engaged in diplomatic relations between the French and English
colonists, and was used by agents employed to arrange an exchange
of captives. The valley was a highway of commerce, particularly in
the operations of the fur trade. Its Indian name, meaning “door of
the country,” was an apt designation, for into it there marched
the flower of contending armies of France, England, and the United
States, who struggled persistently for its control. The destinies of
the United States and Canada and of England’s colonial policy were
largely decided by what occurred in the Champlain valley.

An unjust historical perspective is often created by placing too high
value upon the significance of figures. Large armies do not always
count for as much in their influence upon the course of the world’s
history as events more hidden from view and surrounded with less of
glamour. The one more easily bewitches the eyes, but the other is
more likely to appeal to reason. The history of the Champlain valley
exhibits in relief momentous martial and naval engagements and in
intaglio the deeds of individuals and collections of men pregnant
with far-reaching results in the evolution of the continent of North
America.

Samuel Champlain laid the foundations of New France at Quebec in
1608, and in 1609 led an expedition into the Richelieu River,
accompanied by a retinue of Algonquian and other Canadian Indians.
At the falls of Chambly he abandoned the vessel in which he had
sailed, and by portaging and canoeing reached the entrance of a great
lake, which he named Lake Champlain. Its confines constituted one
of the hunting grounds of the well-organized Iroquoian Confederacy.
The Iroquois were then at great enmity with the Algonquians and the
Canadian Hurons.

On the night of July 29, 1609, Champlain fell in with one of the
hunting parties of the Iroquois. They spent the night in parleying
and uttering defiance at one another, and on the morning of July
30 the now well-known battle of Champlain took place at or near
the site of Ticonderoga, as is generally believed by the best
historians. The significance of this battle is attested by the
alienation of the Iroquois from the French and their affiliation with
the Dutch and English, and was one of the embryonic factors which,
under development, ultimately saved northern New York and a large
contiguous territory to English instead of French interests.

France claimed the region by right of discovery, but England sought
to repress her by the limitations of treaty. In 1731 France violated
the compact of peace by the erection of Fort St. Frédéric on the
peninsula known better as Crown Point. The Iroquois, as claimants of
territorial ownership, in June, 1737, protested against the French
occupation. In 1739 the French commandant promised the Iroquois that
France would not encroach or settle south of Fort St. Frédéric,
but he claimed for his King all the watershed of the St. Lawrence,
inclusive of Lake Champlain and Lake George. In 1742 the fort,
having been enlarged, was the strongest work held by the French in
Canada—Quebec and Louisburg only excepted. The five years’ war,
familiarly known as King George’s war, involved the subjects of
France and England in conflict, both in Europe and in America. A
nominal peace was established by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, in
1748. But soon the Acadian and other boundary contentions between
the two Crowns were in ferment.

France practiced subtlety in her diplomatic negotiations,
strengthened her frontier posts, and inoculated her Indian allies
with hatred of her English colonial neighbors. In 1755 she built Fort
Carillon, afterwards Ticonderoga, and thus advanced her outposts.
Henceforth, and in a seven years’ war, Fort Carillon and Ticonderoga
bore the brunt of frontier aggrandizement. In August of that year
Dieskau occupied Crown Point with 700 regulars, 1,600 Canadians,
and 700 Indians. In 1756, 2,000 men of France were engaged on
Fort Carillon; in 1757 it was garrisoned with 9,000 men under the
Marquis de Montcalm. On July 8, 1758, Abercromby, with regulars and
provincials, unsuccessfully stormed its works and lost nearly 2,000
men. In the same year Robert Rogers, the intrepid ranger, lost 125
out of a total of 180 men. Upon the evacuation of the region by the
French in 1759 General Amherst took possession of Ticonderoga in
July, and of Crown Point in August. In 1760 Amherst assembled an army
of 15,000 men at Crown Point, and in August of that year Colonel
Haviland, with about 3,300 men, opened fire upon the French post at
Isle aux Noix, forced the French commander, Bourlamaque, to withdraw,
and captured the garrison that remained behind.

For a time after the treaty of Paris, in 1763, the region rested
in comparative quiescence. England’s acquisition by treaty of the
vast domain of Canada eradicated the long-standing imbroglios with
France in North America; but the intercolonial wars had schooled the
English-American colonists in the arts of prowess and of war. The
colonists also had greater freedom to consider internal interests,
being now relieved from the erstwhile collisions with the French. A
narrow colonial policy lent itself toward the growth of a spirit of
resentment in the colonies, and England’s determination to enforce
obedience to her will by the employment of military authority
served only to fan the slumbering embers into a conflagration. It
was under these conditions in May, 1775, that the audacious Ethan
Allen, accompanied by only about 83 men, surprised the English
garrison at Fort Ticonderoga and that Seth Warner took Crown Point,
in each case without bloodshed. When De la Place, the English
officer at Ticonderoga, asked Allen by what authority he demanded
the fort’s surrender, he replied with these now memorable words: “By
the authority of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress.”
The personality of Allen was and is yet a subject of academic
controversy, but his action in this affair is a landmark in the
romantic history of America.

Benedict Arnold has been execrated for his treason to his country,
yet his name is connected with one of the greatest of patriotic
services during the American Revolution. On October 11, 1776, he
engaged in an extraordinary naval battle on Lake Champlain against
the overwhelming odds of the British fleet under Sir Guy Carleton.
This battle is in our naval annals of the Revolution what Bunker Hill
is to our military history—“a battle wherein glory and renown were
gained in defeat.” Spears, the naval historian, has characterized it
thus: “Not only was the moral effect of this battle quite as great
in the courage it gave the Americans, and the pause for thought it
gave the enemy; it served to head off a victorious invading British
army bound for Albany and the subjugation of northern New York. It
taught the British that the Americans were not only willing, but they
were able fighters. In spite of the tremendous odds against them, at
the last they had proved themselves as unyielding as the rocks that
echoed back the roar of the conflict.”

Burgoyne made an unsuccessful attack upon the American occupants of
Fort Ticonderoga in June, 1777, but with 7,000 men had forced the
abandonment of Crown Point in that month; and in July, having erected
a battery on Mount Defiance, which commanded Fort Ticonderoga, forced
the Americans to evacuate it on the night of the 6th. The termination
of the American Revolution, save for internal controversies between
New York and Vermont, ended the storm and stress period in the
Champlain valley for many years, until our second war with Great
Britain.

From September 6 to 11, 1814, various land engagements took place
about Plattsburgh. The British forces, numbering about 11,500 troops
and including many of Lord Wellington’s veterans, were under Sir
George Prevost, governor and commander-in-chief in British North
America; the Americans, commanded by Macomb and Bissell, numbered
4,500 men. On September 11, 1814, the American navy on the lake,
commanded by Thomas Macdonough, defeated the British squadron under
the command of Commodore George Downie. This naval battle was crucial
in bringing the war of 1812 to a termination. The success was
acclaimed by the American people everywhere by rejoicing, bonfires,
and illuminations, and was sung in the folk and war ballads of the
day. Congress recognized its national significance by officially
thanking the whole force engaged, and by voting gold medals to
Macdonough, Henley, and Cassin, and a silver medal to each of the
other commissioned officers. In this victory the United States gained
prestige for the demands of the treaty of peace, and an estoppel was
put upon England’s endeavor to get possession of the northeast corner
of the State of Maine.

If the lake itself was the door of the whole northern country,
Larrabee’s Point, on the Vermont side, opposite Fort Ticonderoga, was
a side door to New England, and from that side door the New England
frontiers suffered repeatedly the havoc of Indian devastations. But
there are other places, besides those hitherto mentioned, whose
historic associations are inseparable from a narration of the
landmarks of the Champlain valley. At Burlington, Vt., the first
steamboat on the lake was launched in 1808 and bore the name of that
state. This was only a year after Fulton’s steamer, the _Clermont_,
first plied the Hudson from New York to Albany. Shortly thereafter,
during the period of our second war with Great Britain, Burlington
was a garrisoned post and a base of supplies.

On the Isle La Motte (named from Pierre de St. Paul, sieur de la
Motte-Lusière, a captain of the famous Carignan regiment), the
French built a fort in 1666, which was named Ste. Anne, and in
July of that year, while garrisoned by several companies of the
regiment above alluded to, was invested by hostile Mohawks, whose
depredations included the death of Captains de Traversy and de Chazy.
In October, 1666, M. de Tracy, governor-general of New France, guided
and assembled an expedition on the Isle La Motte for the purpose
of chastising the Iroquois. Twelve hundred combatants, borne by a
fleet of 300 bateaux and canoes, and strengthened by two pieces of
artillery, were engaged. They penetrated to the remotest hamlets of
these Indians and planted the arms of France, in token of taking
formal possession of the whole northern part of New York. The French
remained undisturbed from the Mohawks for nearly a quarter of a
century. Fort Ste. Anne became a Jesuit mission station and was
visited by Bishop Laval in 1668. In August, 1690, Capt. John Schuyler
camped there during his return from a foray into Canada. Gens. Philip
Schuyler and Richard Montgomery met on the island in September, 1775,
during their advance against St. John’s and Montreal, and laid there
the plans for that invasion of Canada. Now the shrine of Ste. Anne,
on the west side of the island, is visited annually by thousands of
devout pilgrims.

Maj. Robert Rogers and 142 men came into Missisquoi Bay in the autumn
of 1760, secreted their boats and some provisions, and went off on an
expedition against the St. Francis Indians, near the village of Three
Rivers, which they burned. Earlier in that year this same intrepid
ranger had landed at the place called Rouse’s Point, near which he
was attacked by a superior body of French from the Isle aux Noix. The
French were defeated and their commander was slain.

Swanton, in Vermont, at an early period formed a considerable
settlement of the French and Indians, being then “probably the
largest in the Champlain valley with the exception of Crown Point.”
At the mouth of Otter Creek, the largest river in Vermont, where Fort
Cassin was built, the American squadron was fitted out in 1814 for
battle against the English navy. This fort was named for Lieutenant
Cassin of our navy, who, with Captain Thornton of the United States
Artillery, in May, 1814, had defended the American fleet then
building there from attempted destruction by the British.

A little to the north of Rouse’s Point are the ruins of Fort
Montgomery, built by error in what was then Canadian soil, and often
called on that account “Fort Blunder,” but corrected by international
boundary concessions. Rouse’s Point is a place of commercial interest
and the most important port of entry on this frontier. Near by is
Point au Fer, fortified in 1776 by the patriot General Sullivan, but
occupied by the British in June of the next year and relinquished
by them only as late as 1788. At Valcour Island, off Bluff Point
and Hotel Champlain, the scene of Arnold’s naval battle of 1776,
the wreck of the _Royal Savage_ lies under water to this day as a
reminder of the beginnings of our national naval adventures. At the
head of the lake to the south, near the present Whitehall, Maj.
Israel Putnam, in August, 1758, was engaged in watching the enemy’s
maneuvers, and had a fierce encounter in the forest with French and
Indians. He was captured, tied to a tree by the Indians, who made
preparations to roast him alive. Only the stern interposition of
the French officer, Marin, prevented them from dispatching him thus
cruelly and robbing the patriot cause of one of its bravest leaders
during the American Revolution.

The New York and Champlain commissions have concluded contracts with
Mr. L. O. Armstrong, of Montreal, to present Indian pageants on
Lake Champlain during the tercentenary celebration. These will be
presented by 150 native Indians, descendants of the original tribes
that occupied portions of the Champlain valley at the time of its
discovery by Champlain. They will reproduce the battle of Samuel
Champlain with the Iroquois and also present a dramatic version of
Longfellow’s Hiawatha on floating barges anchored on the waters of
the lake at various places where exercises are to be held.

It is desirable that the United States detail national troops and
the States of New York and Vermont regiments from the National
Guard to present military pageants at Ticonderoga, Plattsburgh, and
Burlington. The two commissions have decided to hold formal exercises
on July 5, 1909, at Crown Point, on July 6 at Fort Ticonderoga,
on July 7 at Plattsburgh, on July 8 at Burlington, and on July 9
at Isle La Motte, at each of which places Indian pageants will be
presented.

The proposed celebration of the discovery of Lake Champlain may also
include a celebration of such colonial, national, and international
events occurring since the discovery of the lake as to make it
eminently proper that the Government of the United States officially
participate in the exercises commemorating these historical events.
Historical addresses and other literary exercises are to be held,
and it is important that the United States Government invite and
entertain representatives of the Republic of France, the Kingdom of
Great Britain, and the Dominion of Canada. The celebration is of
national and international importance, and the committee recommends
that the resolution do pass.




II. ENGLISH FORTS


The Crown Point forts standing within the confines of the State
Reservation at Crown Point, were frequently mentioned during the
Tercentenary celebration exercises as well as during the dedicatory
ceremonies of the Champlain memorials.

They are of historical and public interest, now that they belong to
the State, through the generosity of Witherbee, Sherman & Co., and
will be preserved from further devastation.

Fort Frédéric was built by Marquis de Beauharnois in honor of the
French Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Frédéric Maurepas, in 1731.
The English forts were constructed under the supervision of General
Jeffrey Amherst as will appear from the following excerpts of the
official “Correspondence of William Pitt,” edited by Gertrude Selwin
Kimball and published by the Macmillan Company.

In his report under date of Crown Point, August 5, 1759, General
Amherst says: “I arrived at Crown Point [August 4th] before the
evening, landed and posted all corps. * * * I ordered [August 5th]
Lt. Colonel Eyre to trace out the ground for a Fort, which I will set
about with all possible expedition.” Correspondence of William Pitt,
Vol. 2, pp. 147-148, published by the Macmillan Company.

General Amherst in his report under date of Crown Point October 22,
1759, to William Pitt, says “to make the fortress as formidable as
I can I ordered with the advise of the Engineer three Forts to be
erected, which I named the Grenadier Fort, the light Infantry Fort, &
Gages light Infantry Fort, ordering those Corps’s to build each their
own as fast as possible.” Correspondence of William Pitt, Vol. 2, p.
191.

In a later report under date of New York December 16, 1759, to
William Pitt, General Amherst (on November 10, 1759, that being the
birthday of George II), says: “The Troops worked till three o’clock,
excepting the Grenadiers, who were under Arms at one o’clock and
fired Volleys. * * * The three Forts firing 21 Cannon, and the
Battalions volleys. The Fortress 21 Cannon, the Army a running fire,
the Park of Artillery 21 Cannon, the Army a general volley * * *.”
Correspondence of William Pitt, Vol. 2, p. 222.

Again in a later report under date of New York, January 7, 1761, to
William Pitt, General Amherst says: “The works of the Fortress of
Crown Point, and of the Forts of Oswego, Pittsburg, and Fort Stanwix,
are not finished so much as I could wish, and I judge, it will be
proper to compleat them in the Spring, and that the Provincials
should furnish men for this Service.” Correspondence of William Pitt,
Vol. 2, p. 382.

It thus appears that the fortress at Crown Point was not completed in
1761, and in fact it was never fully completed.

It does not appear from the foregoing correspondence between General
Amherst and William Pitt or from any of the official reports of
General Amherst that the fortress at Crown Point was officially named
“Fort Amherst,” as it was occasionally denominated in common parlance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Additional light is thrown on the early history of the region in the
papers of Victor Hugo Paltsits, State Historian, and W. Max Reid,
on the Rock Inscription at Crown Point, found in the New York State
Historical Association Publications [Vol. X, pp. 106-113]. In the
papers of Mr. Reid, he says that “The Earl of Waldegrave writes to
the Board of Trade, June 13th, 1732: ‘the French have caused a fort
to be built * * * at a place called _Pointe de la Couronne_, in
English, Crown Point.’” [N. Y. Hist. Assoc. Pub. X, p. 113.]




III. REPORT OF CAPTAIN EDWARD MOTT


In the Journal of Captain Edward Mott, of Preston, Connecticut,
published in the Collections of the Connecticut Historical Society,
Vol. I, pages 163-174, may be found the report of Captain Mott on
the expedition to Ticonderoga and the part taken by the troops under
his command. Therein will be found a discussion of the demand made
by Col. Benedict Arnold that he be placed in command of the men who
had assembled to attempt the capture of Ticonderoga and the reasons
assigned for refusing such demand. An order was finally issued by
Captain Mott as follows:

  To Col. ETHAN ALLEN,

  SIR: Whereas, agreeable to the Power and Authority to us
  given by the Colony of Connecticut, we have appointed you to take
  the command of a party of men and reduce and take possession of the
  garrison of Ticonderoga and its dependencies, and as you are now in
  possession of the same,—You are hereby directed to keep the command
  of said garrison, for the use of the American Colonies, till you
  have further orders from the Colony of Connecticut or from the
  Continental Congress.

               Signed per order of Committee,
                           EDWARD MOTT, _Chairman Committee_.

  TICONDEROGA, _May 10th, 1775_.


The foregoing order appears to have been issued without direct
authorization, but it was acquiesced in by Col. Arnold, who submitted
to the command of Col. Allen and accompanied him in the attack.
They were guided by young Nathan Beman, who was familiar with every
passage of approach to the fort. After the capture of Ticonderoga,
Captain Mott returned to Hartford and was sent to Philadelphia to
inform Congress of the capture of Ticonderoga. And thereafter he
resumed command of his company in the northern army and was present
at the taking of Chambly and the surrender of St. John’s. His
elder brother, Samuel, was appointed engineer and was stationed at
Ticonderoga and Crown Point, and in August became Chief Engineer
under General Schuyler of the northern army. Captain Edward Mott
became major in the regiment under Col. Gay. The devotion and
distinguished services of Captain Mott and Samuel Mott, his brother,
during the Revolution were recognized in their rapid promotion in the
northern army.




IV. NOTES ON THE ARCHÆOLOGY OF THE CHAMPLAIN VALLEY

BY PROFESSOR GEORGE H. PERKINS, Ph.D.

State Geologist of Vermont


It is undoubted that the Champlain valley at the time when the
first Europeans entered the region was occupied by two great Indian
peoples, the Confederacy of the Six Nations and the Algonkins or
Abnaki. To the Six Nations the name Iroquois was generally given by
the French explorers. They held full sway over the New York side of
the Champlain valley, but the occupancy of the eastern, or Vermont,
side is less certain. There can be no question that this side of
the valley was possessed by the Algonkins for the greater part of
the time, but there are several centuries when it is not easy to
determine certainly the precise relations of these two peoples.
Most of what became New England and the Atlantic border and a vast
territory in Canada was always, so far as can be now discovered,
occupied by the Algonkins who also reached far westward and southward
through the Mississippi valley. The Iroquois occupied a comparatively
small area about lakes Erie and Ontario and eastward along the St.
Lawrence, including the whole of what is now New York, as well as
parts of Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and a long, narrow strip of
Canada north of New York.

They also occupied territory in the south, west of the Carolinas.
How long or how completely the Iroquois possessed the Vermont side
of the Champlain valley we may never know, but it appears to be
pretty certain that they did for a time, and probably several times,
dispossess the usual owners and hold as their own the entire shore of
Champlain. It appears from various records that sometime about 1540
the Iroquois were in control of both sides of the lake and of the
Vermont as well as the New York shores. It also appears that these
people held the region for a century when they withdrew. Why they
retired to the western side is not plain. Considering their warlike
disposition and reputation and the very great fear in which they
were held by the Algonkins it is impossible to believe that these
latter drove them back across the lake, and yet why they should have
voluntarily left their eastern possessions one cannot readily explain.

In 1640 Father Ducreux made a map of the region and on this map Lake
Champlain is made the western boundary of the Algonkin territory, so
that by this time the ownership had again changed.

In 1690, as is well known, the Algonkins and French destroyed
Schenectady and, though their force was very small, they appear to
have passed without any difficulty through the Champlain valley, and
had it been occupied by Mohawks or any Iroquois tribe this could not
have been possible.

At different times for many years various Vermont legislatures were
beset by claims which the Caughnawaga Indians persistently entered.
These claims were for remuneration for land taken by the white men
from their ancestors and which they declared were formerly the
property of their tribe.

The territory which the Caughnawagas claimed was finally defined by
them as bounded by Lake Champlain on the west and on the east by the
mountain ranges which divide the waters running into Lake Champlain
from the Missisquoi, Lamoille and Winooski rivers from those which
run into the Connecticut, together with so much of the land drained
by Otter creek as would be embraced by a line drawn from Ticonderoga
to the sources of the Winooski.

So far as can be ascertained by examination of documents, the
validity or invalidity of this claim was neither denied nor allowed,
but the claim was never in any way granted. As intimated, it was
repeatedly advanced at different sessions of the General Assembly
until finally abandoned in 1874. From the persistency with which the
Indians brought forward their claim it seems probable that whether it
had any substantial basis or not, they really believed that it had.

In a very full and interesting discussion of this question, Mr. D.
P. Thompson in an Appendix to the History of Montpelier, Vt., writes
as follows: “In the published journal of the expedition of Champlain
when in the summer of 1609 he discovered the lake that bears his name
we have full and direct evidence that the Iroquois were in possession
of just about the same tract of territory in Vermont as that to which
their descendants have latterly been laying claim as a part of their
original domain.”

Champlain also found that the Algonkins were at war with the Iroquois
and, as this author suggests, this war may very likely have grown
out of the encroachment of the Iroquois upon this territory which
formerly had belonged to the Algonkins. Moreover, Champlain states
in his narrative that when he asked his companions who lived on the
east shores of the lake through which they were passing they told
him that they were Iroquois. It also appears to be true that the
early French explorers called Lake Champlain the Lake or Sea of
the Iroquois. However, while the Algonkins admitted at the time of
Champlain’s visit that the Iroquois held the Champlain valley on
both sides, they asserted that it originally belonged to them, as it
was occupied by their forefathers. The truth, so far as it can be
ascertained, appears to be that the first inhabitants of the western
side of the Champlain valley were Iroquois, and those of the eastern
side were Algonkins; that at some time before 1540 the Iroquois
crossed the lake and drove out the people then living on the eastern
side, and for many, perhaps a hundred, years, themselves occupied
that territory. In or about 1640, for reasons not discoverable,
they left the eastern shores and all the territory now included in
Vermont and no further trace of them appears in that region. How long
the Champlain valley was occupied by these two peoples can never be
known, or whether at any early time some other and different people
roamed over the region. All that we do know or can know is that at
the coming of the white men, and for at least several centuries
before, these and only these tribes were here.

Turning now to a consideration of some of the evidence of former
occupation which these peoples have left we find a great variety
of implements and weapons of stone and a smaller number of copper
and iron. Household utensils, simple and few as were the needs of
people, who were in the stone age of civilization, are also found
made of stone, earthenware and bone. A detailed enumeration of these,
though of great interest to the archæologist would be tedious to
the general reader. For this reason only a general account of these
objects will be given.

From what has been written above it will be obvious that practically
all of the objects found on the New York side of the valley are of
Iroquois origin, but of those found in Vermont we may be sure that
many are Algonkin. It is also sure that mingled with these there must
be many of Iroquoian origin. When, however, we attempt to decide
which of the implements or other objects are Algonkian and which
Iroquoian we undertake a very difficult task. Some of the pottery
and some of the stone objects are plainly of Iroquois manufacture
and others are Algonkian, but most of our specimens are not to be
classified. The Iroquois were superior in culture to other tribes and
their handiwork is finer as a whole, but after all the quality of the
work does not, as a rule, at all suffice to distinguish between their
implements and others. Quite extensive collections have been made
on both sides of the lake, and when these are compared very great
similarity is at once observed. And yet there are some differences
though, as has been indicated, not enough to differentiate one group
from the other. It is noticeable that in any considerable collection
of objects of Indian manufacture from the Champlain valley, there are
many of exceedingly fine workmanship. No better specimens of their
kind are to be found anywhere than the best of our Champlain valley
specimens. Probably because of the rocky and, at times inaccessible,
character of the western shore, and the more level and inhabitable
nature of the Vermont shores, Indian relics of all sorts have been
found in much greater abundance on the eastern than on the western
side of the lake.

Much of the New York shore is rugged and affords no good camping
ground or village sites, while the Vermont shores are mostly level,
or nearly so, and offer abundant invitation to wandering tribes to
remain. And yet, as Champlain informs the reader, there were in his
day no permanent villages because of hostilities. The whole Champlain
valley, or at any rate that part of it which adjoins the lake, was
unsafe territory to the long-staying camper, and still more to those
who would establish a village. War or hunting parties might traverse
its forests, but none might safely tarry long.

As every collector of Indian relics well knows, it is about the camp,
or better still, village sites that most abundant specimens occur,
and as these are very few in the immediate vicinity of the lake
so the number of objects found is comparatively small as compared
to such localities as the Ohio or Mississippi region. Still some
thousands of specimens have been collected along the shores of Lake
Champlain and in their immediate neighborhood. As everywhere, the
spear and arrow points, and similarly shaped knives, are by far the
most abundant of all objects that have been found. These chipped
points are almost always made from hard, often quartzose rock, and
are of many forms and various degrees of excellence. By far the
greater number are of a gray quartzite which is abundant in ledges
in the region. The most common form on both sides of the lake is the
simple triangle. This shape occurs of many sizes from little points a
half inch long to those that are four or five inches long. They may
be narrow or broad, usually without haft or barb, though these may be
present in some of the less common specimens. While none are as large
as the larger flaked implements of the west, some are several inches
long, a few of the very largest being seven or eight. Some few of the
points are as finely proportioned and elegantly made as can be found
anywhere, though as a rule the flaked objects are less attractive
than those from the west. This is partly due to the color and texture
of the material, for the quartzites, etc., of the east are much less
prettily colored than those which are found in the west or middle
west. Finely barbed and stemmed points and knives are less abundant
than the simpler forms, but many specimens occur and some are very
finely made.

Besides these points other chipped or flaked objects are found,
such as scrapers and drills. A form of point or, more probably,
knife is found more commonly, I think, in the Champlain valley than
elsewhere, though not peculiar to this region. These are of similar
form to the better hafted and stemmed, chipped points, but they
are of red or purple slate and were ground at least as they were
completed, though they may have been first shaped by chipping, as
some of them undoubtedly were. Some of these are strikingly like the
modern Eskimo knife. Dr. Beauchamp has figured some of these slate
knives in Bulletin 18, New York State Museum, and says as to their
distribution: “In some parts of Canada they are about as common as
in New York, being most abundant on both sides of Lake Ontario.
They have not been reported east of Lake Champlain, except in its
immediate vicinity, with the exception of one in Maine, nor do they
reach more than half way southward to the Pennsylvania line.”

Perhaps that class of implements known as gouges is more common in
the Champlain valley than elsewhere. These objects are of various
proportions, some being long and slender, others short and wide, but
whatever the shape, there is always the U-shaped groove which gives
the name. This groove may extend only a short distance from the
cutting edge as in the ordinary carpenter’s gouge, or it may go from
end to end. The gouges are usually fashioned from moderately soft
stone though some are of that which is very hard. They are generally
well finished and some are so regular in form and so beautifully
smoothed and polished that they are not surpassed by any specimens
that we have. As a rule they are of medium size, six or eight inches
long, but most elegantly finished specimens are in our museums that
are fourteen to twenty inches long.

What are called celts or hand axes are more numerous and, as a class,
somewhat ruder than the gouges, though some of them are as finely
made as possible.

Like the gouges the celts were rubbed and ground into shape, except
in very rare cases, when a very hard stone was shaped by flaking.
They are generally not more than four or five inches long, though
some have been found that are twice this size. The material is
usually some sort of very hard stone.

Of ruder sort than other implements are the numerous hammers. Often
these are merely water smoothed river or beach pebbles upon which
no work at all has been expended, and the only proof of human usage
is seen in the battered ends. More rarely the hammer has been worked
over its whole surface. Of course hammers or other implements used
for pounding would not ordinarily be carried on long journeys and
consequently would not be likely to be found far from a somewhat
permanent camp. Hence, although very abundant in a few localities,
these objects are not widely distributed. And the same is true of
the boiling stones, which are of the same sort as the hammer stones,
the difference being that the latter bear the bruises caused by
their use, while the pebbles which were heated and thrown into the
earthenware pots to heat the water show evidence of being heated, but
no abrasion.

The hammer stone when long and more or less slender becomes a pestle.
Pestles are not common though in all a considerable number have been
found in the Champlain valley. Some of these are only five or six
inches long, and from this size they may be found of various lengths
and weights to those over two feet long and weighing nearly thirty
pounds. Some of these large pestles are finely shaped and of hard
stone, so that great labor must have been expended in their making.

Several so-called pestles have been found in the region we are
considering which are especially interesting because they are not
only well shaped, but at one end they are carved to resemble the head
of some animal. These are long and slender and should probably be
regarded as clubs rather than pestles.

Without some sort of mortar the pestle would be of little use, and
where one is found the other may be expected. Yet it is noticeable
that mortars are very uncommon in this region. Some very excellent
examples have been found, but more often little labor was expended
upon the mortars beyond that necessary to hollow out the cavity.
This cavity was in some cases hollowed on one side only, but often
there was made a hollow on each side. These were usually circular and
several inches deep, but in some of the largest mortars the hollowed
portion is oval and more or less irregular. Naturally the mortars
would be of considerable weight, from ten to fifty pounds.

The most common axe or hatchet was undoubtedly the celt or hand axe,
already mentioned, but for heavier work larger axes were needed, and
these are found, though not in large numbers. These larger axes may
be six, eight or ten inches long and weigh several pounds, though
we have none as large as many which have been found in the west and
south. Some are very rude, others very carefully shaped and well
finished. All have a groove around them by which a handle could be
more firmly attached. These large grooved axes seem to us very clumsy
and inefficient tools, but Champlain in his account of making a camp
for the night on one of the large islands in the lake, says that
his Indian companions cut down large trees with these “meschantes
haches,” so that they were certainly much more useful than they
appear to us to be.

There is a class of objects which seem to be more or less
problematical. They are of very different shape, but always quite
unlike objects designed for use as implements; always well and
often very finely made and finished and of handsome material. These
occur on both sides of the lake and form the chief treasures of
collections. They are some of them suitable for ornament or for
ceremonial purposes, but some do not appear designed for any known
use. Nevertheless they are fashioned with such care and are so
attractive in themselves that it is not possible to regard them as
unimportant to those who made them. By different writers they have
been called as they are of one form or another—ceremonial stones,
banner stones, gorgets, etc. And it is more than probable that some
were used as indicated by these names, but some of them are quite
puzzling. The flat pieces of slate or other stone which are included
among the specimens mentioned are usually drilled once or twice and
were apparently attached to the clothing or hung about the neck as
ornaments. Others, the so-called banner stones, are thicker, of
harder material, semi-lunar or more or less crescent shape and have a
large hole bored through the middle. It is possible, but not certain,
that these were in some way badges of office. A very few of the
so-called birdshead stones have also been found.

The discoidal stones, found especially in the south, are very rare in
the Champlain valley. A few rather rough specimens have been found,
but I have seen only one really fine specimen and this is small,
about two and a half inches in diameter, of white quartz and very
finely made.

Stone and earthenware pipes, some of them of very interesting form
and finely polished are not numerous, but a goodly number have been
found. The earthenware pipes are of various shape, a few tubular,
more with bowl and stem, much like the modern pipe. The stone pipes
are very variable in form, no two being alike, but as elsewhere,
finely finished. Yet the pipes of the Champlain valley are much less
elaborate than those from the mounds or other localities, and none of
the earthenware specimens are effigies, or with head-shaped bowls,
such as are found in New York west of the Adirondacks.

A very interesting form of pipe has been found in Swanton, on
the Vermont side of the lake. A dozen or more of these have been
obtained. They are simply straight tubes of stone from seven to
twelve inches long and about an inch in diameter. They very closely
resemble the tubular pipes of the Pacific coast and South America.

It is noticeable that the pipes of the Champlain valley rarely
imitate any human or animal form. I know of only one which resembles
an animal and two or three which bear on the bowl the human face.

Of earthenware or pottery a very great variety has been found.
In this more than in any of the stone objects we are able at
least partially to separate the Algonkian from the Iroquoian. The
earthenware of the Champlain valley is sometimes almost without
decoration, but by far the greater portion was ornamented at least
about the rim and usually over much of the upper portion and
sometimes even inside the upper part for one or two inches below the
rim. No animal or human form is found in any specimen. The form is
always globular below, the rim being contracted and variously shaped.
In some cases the rim is quadrangular or five or six sided, although
as stated, the lower part is always globular. Whole jars are, as is
to be expected, very rare, but three fine specimens from Vermont are
in the University Museum and one was in the fine collection of Dr.
D. S. Kellogg of Plattsburgh, which was found near that place.[3]
Large fragments, in some instances almost enough to reconstruct a
whole jar, have been found on both sides of the valley. For the most
part the pottery of the region is in fragments from the size of one’s
hand to mere bits not larger than a pea. These fragments have been
found in very great quantity. A short distance north of Plattsburgh
near what is locally called “The Creek,” there were evidently many
jars made, for some years ago the sand blown off revealed the old
fireplaces where the pots were burned and an immense number of
fragments were picked up. The decoration is in all cases indented,
none in relief. It consists of all sorts of figures, crescents,
key-shaped figures, circles, dots, triangles, squares, zigzags, etc.,
and groups of lines, arranged in every conceivable fashion, all
stamped or drawn on the clay when it was soft. Some of the patterns
are really very attractive and done with no little skill. Only by the
aid of plates can any adequate idea of the variety and elegance of
these designs or of the earthenware as a whole be given.

In quality the Champlain valley pottery varies as in every other
respect. Some of it is of the finest paste and carefully burned;
some is of very coarse material and more carelessly burned. Over the
surface of most specimens after the piece was shaped and perhaps
partly dried, a thin, smooth paste was added which covered the ruder
mass of which the jar was mainly composed. As to the size of most of
the jars it is only possible to give an approximate measure because
of their fragmentary condition, but, with those that are entire and
the larger fragments as guides, it may be said that they varied from
those holding a pint to those holding ten quarts. As to what may
be called the nationality of the pottery, it may be noticed that
while there is much resemblance there are important differences. The
entire jars and the finest of the fragments are to be regarded as
made by Iroquois, while the simpler forms, especially those found
on the eastern side of the valley are Algonkian. While the work of
the Iroquois is superior to that of the Algonkins, yet when it is
remembered that all of the pottery was made entirely by hand, the
regularity of form and general excellence are remarkable.

Soapstone dishes, such as are common in some parts of New England,
are also found here, but they are very infrequent and always badly
broken. Soapstone is not uncommon on the Vermont side of the valley,
but the ancient residents seem to have preferred to use pots of
earthenware.

Bone was probably used by the aborigines to a much greater extent
than now appears, for this material was used to so great an extent
by other tribes and is so readily fashioned into certain classes of
implements and was always at hand that it would surely have been a
common material for many of the smaller implements, such as awls,
needles, points for marking pottery, fishing spears and the like.

Until within a few years only a very few bone objects of any sort had
been found, but recently quite a number of various sorts have been
found on the east shore of the lake and a few on the west. Some of
these are like the many-barbed spear points of the Eskimo, but most
are the ordinary awls, blunt points, etc. These latter were probably
used mainly for drawing the lines and figures on the unbaked pottery.
Canine teeth of the bear were carefully and evidently with no little
labor cut or ground until half was removed and the remaining half
brought to a sharp edge. As would be expected, objects of shell are
uncommon and all that have been found are marine and from southern
species. The little marginella conoidalis of the Carolina coast was
used whole, evidently as beads, and the columella of the ordinary
conch was cut into large beads an inch or more long and nearly as
much in diameter. Like the beads made from the marginella these were
perforated longitudinally and the surface ground smooth. These shell
beads are interesting because they are proof of traffic between the
northern and southern tribes. Bits of coral several inches long, the
surface smoothed, have been found and furnish added evidence of trade
with other tribes, as none of these materials can be obtained from
northern waters.

Native copper is not found nearer the Champlain valley than Lake
Superior, and here again we find proof of traffic with distant
tribes, for copper implements and ornaments of different sorts have
been found in several localities on both sides of the lake. Spear
points, knives, celts, gouges made from copper, beaten into shape,
have been found, and one large specimen weighing thirty-eight ounces,
a celt eight inches long, was evidently cast in a mould. This was
found a few years ago at the mouth of Otter creek, on the Vermont
shore.

Besides those objects, which were for use as tools, there are copper
bars, which were probably ornaments, and small beads made by beating
the metal into sheets and rolling pieces of the thin copper into
cylinders. We cannot know much as to the age of the objects thus
far mentioned. It is certain that their use reaches back centuries
before the coming of the white men, but how far into the remote past
of this country none may say. When we find anything made from iron,
however, there is no difficulty in assigning it an age, since the
French adventurers came to the American wilderness and bartered their
hatchets and other articles of iron for that which they needed from
the savages. Queer shaped axes or tomahawks, pipes, etc., are now and
then found always much rusted, but always of interest.

In the preceding pages there has not been any attempt to give
more than a summary of what has been found during the past fifty
or seventy-five years in the Champlain valley, which illustrates
somewhat the life and handicraft of those to whom the region belonged
before it was taken from them by the incoming Europeans.

Those who may care to pursue the subject further are referred to Dr.
Beauchamp’s writings in Bulletins 16, 22, 50, 89 of the New York
State Museum and to articles by the writer of this paper in the
American Anthropologist, Vol. 11, pp. 607-623, plates XXIX-XXXVII;
Vol. 13, pp. 239-249, plates XII-XVII; Vol. 14, pp. 72-80, plates
I-V, also Seventh Report Vermont State Geologist, pp. 55-73, plates
V-XVIII.




V. FINANCIAL STATEMENT


                                   ALBANY, N. Y., _May 26, 1913_.

_To the Comptroller of the State of New York:_

Pursuant to chapter 181 of the Laws of 1911, as amended by chapter
273 of the Laws of 1912, we, the undersigned Commissioners, submit
herewith a full report of all receipts and disbursements of the Lake
Champlain Tercentenary Commission of the State of New York, as of the
date of May 26, 1913.

  Very respectfully,
         H. WALLACE KNAPP, _Chairman_
         HENRY W. HILL, _Secretary_
         WALTER C. WITHERBEE, _Treasurer_
         JOHN H. BOOTH
         LOUIS C. LAFONTAINE
         JAMES J. FRAWLEY
         JAMES A. FOLEY
         JAMES SHEA
         JOHN B. RILEY
         HOWLAND PELL
         WILLIAM R. WEAVER

                                                     _Commissioners_


REPORT OF W. C. WITHERBEE, TREASURER, NEW YORK—LAKE CHAMPLAIN
TERCENTENARY COMMISSION, AS OF MAY 26, 1913.

  Received from United States Government             $20,000 00
  By vouchers on file in Washington                   20,000 00
                                                    ===========
  Received from
    State Treasurer                                 $125,833 72
    Vermont Commission account Crown Point Memorial   13,325 00
    Vermont Commission account cost of barges          2,000 00
    Hudson-Fulton Commission account cost of barges    6,000 00
    Sale of six barges                                 2,244 00
    S. H. P. Pell—sale of dock at Ticonderoga            500 00
    M. J. Farrell account sale of badges               1,395 00
    W. W. Richards account sale of grandstand
      at Ticonderoga                                      97 44
    W. F. Miller account sale of badges                   97 07
    Henry W. Hill account sale of badges                  25 10
    Presbyterian Church, Whitehall                         4 76
    Parkhurst & Taylor, insurance rebate                   8 73
    Conscience money                                       1 00
    H. W. Knapp, refund of transportation                  3 76
    Booth Bros. & H. I. G. Co. account overpayment
      of voucher No. 485 to them                          46 92
                                                    -----------
                                                               $151,582 50
                                                               ===========
  By vouchers on file with State Comptroller       $149, 936 15
  By cash on hand, retained for Secretary
      of Commission, for expenses incurred and
      to be incurred in connection with finishing
      and distributing reports, and to be
      accounted for in final report (estimated).         200 00
  By cash on hand, retained for Plattsburgh contract
      accepted by the Commission, for
      retaining wall not yet completed,—vouchers
      to accompany final report                        1,346 35
      (See accompanying letters.)
  By check to State Treasurer                            100 00
                                                   ------------
                                                               $151,582 50
                                                               ===========


  STATE OF NEW YORK, }
  COUNTY OF ESSEX,   } ss.:

  WALTER C. WITHERBEE, being duly sworn, deposes and says that the
  above is a true statement of the moneys received and expended
  by him as Treasurer of the New York—Lake Champlain Tercentenary
  Commission.

                                                  WALTER C. WITHERBEE.

  Sworn to and signed before me this 26th day of May, 1913.

                                HALFORD E. KIDDER,
                                        _Notary Public, Essex County_.


STATEMENT OF COST OF MEMORIALS

  _Crown Point_
    Booth Bros. & Hurricane Isle Granite Co.:
      Contract for general work                    $34,850 00
      Additional foundations                           323 00
      Model for carved work                             50 00
      Lower flight granite steps                     2,925 00
      Glass for lantern                                125 00
      Corbel for Rodin bust                             56 10
      Bronze hook, staple and lock for gallery door     16 50
      Freighting, hauling and erecting models           35 00
      Freighting, hauling and erecting bronze           95 00
      Concrete paving                                  745 00
                                                    ---------  $39,220 60
    Statuary contract—Charles Augustus Heber                     9,000 00
    Architect’s fees—Dillon, McLellan & Beadel                   2,893 23
    Amount allowed for concrete wall at base of steps              200 00
                                                              -----------
          Total                                                $51,313 83

  _Plattsburgh_
    Booth Bros. & Hurricane Isle Granite Co.        $10,366 42
    Statuary contract—Charles Augustus Heber          6,775 00
    Architect’s fees—Dillon, McLellan & Beadel        1,714 14
    Ralph L. Signor, surveyor                            60 35
    Express and duty on plans— Ottawa to Plattsburgh      1 25
    Amount allowed for retaining wall                 1,346 35
                                                    ---------- $20,263 51
                                                               ----------
          Grand total                                          $71,577 34
                                                               ==========




[Illustration: CHARLES ALEXANDER NELSON

Indexer]




ANALYTICAL INDEX

Compiled by

CHARLES ALEXANDER NELSON, A. M., Head Reference Librarian
(Retired) of Columbia University


  Abercromby, James, General, defeated by Montcalm at Ticonderoga, 40,
        102, 231;
    the Black Watch in the assault under, 129.

  Abnaki, The Algonkins or, 247.

  Academy of Moral and Political Science, Paul Vidal de la Blache
        delegate of the, 94.

  Acadian and other boundary contentions, 231.

  Action, La pensée américaine se formule en termes d’, 64.

  Activities of the Tercentenary Commissioners, 217-18.

  Adams, Harold J., lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Adirondacks, M. Deschamps on the snow-capped, 82;
    Vidal de la Blache on the, 95;
    M. Bazin on the, 101;
    Port Henry one of five gateways to the, 151;
    Port Kent one of the gateways to the, 152;
    wall in Lake Champlain on the West, 153;
    as seen from Vermont, 167.

  Aero Club of France represented by M. Léon Barthou, 17.

  Æsthetics, Appreciation of ideals in, by the French and Italians,
        18-19;
    Croce’s intuitional theory of, 20.

  Africa, M. Hanotaux on the future cities of, 14.

  Aix-la-Chapelle, Treaty of, 230.

  Alexander, Charles Beatty, Reception to French delegates and
        Commissions by, 27;
    at banquet, 32;
    gift of Sèvres bisque group from French Government to, 111;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Alexander, De Alva Stanwood, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Alexander, John White, welcomed French delegates to French Institute,
        26.

  Alger, George William, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Algonkian and Iroquian handiwork, Difficulty of distinguishing, 250.

  Algonkins, The, or Abnaki, _see_ Algonquins, The.

  Algonquians, _see_ Algonquins.

  Algonquins, the, Warfare of, and Iroquois, 41, 145, 249;
    high and mighty talk of chiefs of, 146;
    Lake Champlain the battle ground of the, 226;
    in possession of eastern shore of the Lake, 247;
    territory occupied by the, 247, 248;
    and French destroyed Schenectady, 248;
    first inhabitants of eastern shore of the Lake, 249.

  Allan, Montagu, Vice-Pres. of Franco-American Committee of Montreal,
        89.

  Allds, Jotham Powers, Chairman of Committee on Appropriations, 182.

  Allegorical bust, The, “La France,” and the personnel and mission of
        the French delegation, 11-21:
    Interest in France, 13;
    appeal of M. Hanotaux in _Le Figaro_, 13-16;
    the French delegation, 16-17;
    Rodin’s bust of “La France,” 17-18;
    Allegorical interpretation by HENRY W. HILL, 18-21.

  Allen, Ethan, captured Ticonderoga, 145, 231-32;
    speech of, to soldiers before the attack, 146;
    on witnessing lowering of His Majesty’s colors, 146;
    reply of, to British officer, 232;
    ordered by Edward Mott to take Ticonderoga, 243.

  Allen, Ira, on Ticonderoga, 72;
    “Natural and political history of the State of Vermont,” 197, 209;
    gave all his property to University of Vermont, 199;
    papers of, 209;
    a Major-General of State Militia, 209.

  Allen, John Johnson, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Allens, Independence and resolution of the, 199.

  Alliance Française, of Boston, welcomed French delegation, 27.

  Ambassadors of France and Great Britain, invited to dedications, 117;
    participated in Tercentenary exercises, 119;
    sent representatives to
    dedicatory exercises, 119, 133;
    at the Tercentenary celebrations, 143.

  America, Closer relations between France and, 90;
    honors herself in honoring Frenchmen, 97;
    raised monuments to French heroes, 142;
    century of peace between France, England, and, 164.

  American Arts Society, Loan exhibition in building of, 26.

  American flag, Largest, unfurled from masthead of any vessel, 27.

  American hospitality, M. Poincaré on, 92;
    M. Bazin on, 101.

  American memorials to Champlain examined, 2.

  American people, Tribute of French delegates to the, 109.

  Amherst, Sir Jeffrey, General, erected the English forts, 52, 77,
        127, 239-40;
    portrait of, on Tablet, 127;
    list of regiments under, 127;
    deeds of, 128;
    besieged Fort Carillon, 145;
    correspondence of, with William Pitt, 198, 239-40;
    took possession of Ticonderoga and Crown Point, 231.

  Andrews, George R., M. C., Justice of Supreme Court, 205.

  Andromeda, The nebula in, 21.

  Angelus, Call of the, at Saint Jean, 86.

  Annapolis, Monument to French soldiers and sailors at, 142.

  Appropriation for New York Commission, 226;
    for Vermont Commission, 226.

  Arbitration treaties, Hope for French and English, 79.

  Archæology of the Champlain valley, Notes on the, (G. H.
        PERKINS), 247-58.

  Archives, foreign and American, Transcripts of documents in, 198.

  Arms on base of Memorial Lighthouse, 5.

  Armstrong, Louis Olivier, and his company of Indians, Obligations of
        Commission to, for pageants, 191;
    manager of the Indian pageants, 235.

  Armstrong, William W., Senator, Chairman of Committee on
        Appropriations, 182.

  Army, Natives of the Champlain valley in the, 207, 209.

  Arnold, Benedict, commanded American fleet at battle of Valcour, 40,
        152-53;
    not yet traitor, 128;
    extraordinary naval battle of, 232;
    demanded command of the men to capture Fort Ticonderoga, 243.

  Arnold, Matthew, James Buckham compared with, 214.

  Arquebuse, Champlain’s, 8, 137.

  Arrow and spear points, Chipped, 251.

  Art, An interpretation of French, by H. W. Hill, 18-20;
    civilization expressed through, 64-65.

  _Art L’_, by Auguste Rodin, 20n.

  Arthur, Chester Alan, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Artists, American and French, 26.

  “As You Like It,” Quotation from, 168-69.

  Ashley, Jerold Myers, Captain Company “M,” 1st Infantry, N. G., Vt.,
        at Crown Point Forts, 121, 125.

  Athene Parthenos, The, and “La France,” 19.

  Atlantic, Nine voyages across the, by Champlain, 138.

  Attendance at Crown Point and Plattsburgh exercises, 119.

  Authors from the Champlain valley, A few of the works of, 209-14.

  Axes, Large stone, grooved, found, 254.


  Babcock, Joseph Weeks, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Babcock’s, Col., Rhode Island Rangers and Indians, under Gen.
        Amherst, 127.

  Bacon, Robert, accompanied French delegation on tour, 16;
    gift of American flag to S.S. _France_ by, 27;
    accompanied French delegation to Boston, 27;
    guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Badges, Souvenir, presented to French delegates, 17.

  Bailey, Horace Ward, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 224, 226.

  Baker, Charles Whiting, editor of _Engineering News_, from the
        Champlain valley, 213.

  Baker, Moses Nelson, author and editor, from the Champlain valley,
        213.

  Bakers, Independence and resolution of the, 199.

  Balaklava, The Light Brigade at, and the Black Watch at Fort
        Ticonderoga, 129.

  Ball given to French delegation by Mr. John Barrett, 27.

  Banner stones, and other problematical objects, found, 254.

  Banquet at Waldorf-Astoria, May 1, 1912, 31-55:
      Guests, 31-32;
      address of John H. Finley, toastmaster, 33-34;
      address of George W. Wickersham, 34-37;
      address of Ambassador Jusserand, 37-39;
      address of Lieut.-Governor Thomas F. Conway, 40-43;
      address of Mayor Gaynor, 43-44;
      address of Gabriel Hanotaux presenting bust to Commissions, 44-50;
      address of Henry W. Hill receiving gift on behalf of the two
        Commissions, 51-55;
    photograph of, given to each delegate from France, 90;
    Lake Champlain Association took charge of, 118.

  Barber, Joel Allen, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 203.

  Barnes, Albert Crane, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Barrett, John, gave a ball in honor of the French delegation, 27.

  Barrett, Oliver Dana, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Bartholdi, Frédéric Auguste, presented statue of Liberty, 54, 60.

  Barthou, Jean Louis, member of French delegation, 16;
    speaker at luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    made a glowing address at the Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 50;
    spoke in French at Chamber of Commerce reception, 67;
    President of the Council of Ministers, 67;
    guest at dinner to French delegation on its return to Paris, 91;
    remarks at dinner, 93;
    urbanity and eloquence of, 110.

  Barthou, Léon, member of French delegation, 17, 44;
    address of, at luncheon at the Metropolitan Club, 25;
    made address at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 50.

  Bartlett, Paul, Carl A. Heber in studio of, 2;
    sculptor of statue of Lafayette, 163.

  Bascom, Robert O., Bibliography of papers by, 213.

  Battle of Champlain with the Iroquois reproduced in pageants, 235.

  “Battle of Lake Champlain,” painting, 159.

  BAZIN, RENÉ, of the French Academy, member of the French
        delegation, 16, 44;
    impressed by the Memorial Lighthouse, 72;
    Impressions, as given in “Paysages d’Amérique,” in the _Revue des
        Deux Mondes_, 101-6:
      Of New York and Washington, 101;
      of early morning at Ticonderoga, 101;
      at the home of S. H. P. Pell, 102;
      Carillon, 102;
      of visit to ruins of the forts, 103-4;
      the standards of the regiments of France, 103;
      house at the fort a museum, 104;
      Americans at the exercises at Crown Point, 104-5;
      what the flags say, 105;
      tribute to Champlain by, 105-6;
    beauty of style of, 110.

  Beadel, Henry Ludlow, architect of Memorials, 2, 6, 8;
    welcomed the French delegation, 16.

  Beauchamp, William Martin, Description of slate knives by, 252;
    writings of, 258.

  Beauharnois, Charles de la Brische, Marquis de, built Fort Frédéric,
        52, 85, 227, 239.

  Beaupre, Frederick Oliver, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 226;
    at dedication of the Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Beauty, C. W. Eliot on Democracy and, 140.

  Beckwith, George Mather, lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Bégin, Mgr. Louis Nazaire, helped entertain French visitors in
        Canada, 89.

  Beman, Nathan, guide to Ethan Allen at capture of Fort Ticonderoga,
        243.

  Benedict, Charles Linnæus, Judge, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Benedict, George Grenville, Colonel, Works of, 211.

  Benedict, Robert Dewey, lawyer, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Bennet, William Stiles, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Bennett, Edmund Hatch, Judge, Editorial work of, 210.

  Bensel, John Anderson, invited to dedications, 117.

  Benton, Guy Potter, LL.D., invited to dedications, 118.

  Bi-State programme of International Tercentenary exercises, A fitting
        postlude to the, 51.

  Birds of France and America, M. Blériot on the, 67.

  Birdshead stones found, 254.

  Bissell, Daniel G., Brig.-Gen. of the American troops at Plattsburgh,
        233.

  Bitter, Karl Theodore Francis, C. A. Heber worked under, 2.

  Bixby, Dr. George Fairbanks, “The first Battle of Lake Champlain,”
        197;
    papers by, 214.

  Black Watch—42d Royal Highlanders, under Gen. Amherst, 127;
    a soldier of the, on the Tablet, 127, 129;
    loss of the, at Fort Ticonderoga, 129.

  Blair, Charles Francis, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Blériot, Louis, member of French delegation, 17;
    remarks of, at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 66-67;
    French admiration for American aviators and scientists, 67;
    guest at dinner to French delegation on its return to Paris, 92.

  Blériot, Madame, member of French delegation, 17.

  Block House in Germain Redoubt at Fort Ticonderoga, 71.

  Bluff Point, M. Jusserand on visit to, 38;
    Commissioners and guests at, 120, 153.

  Board of Trade of Montreal joined in reception, 89.

  Boardman, Rev. George Nye, author of “History of New England
        theology,” 211.

  Boardman, Samuel Ward, Works of, 211.

  Boire, Victor Francis, welcomed French visitors to Plattsburgh, 77-79:
    Welcomed individually, 78;
    peace projects between United States and British Empire, 78;
    arbitration treaties between French speaking and English speaking
        nations hoped for, 79.

  Boizot, Louis Simon, sculptor of bisque group “Télémaque chez
        Calypso,” 111.

  Bone, Objects made of, found, 257.

  Booth Brothers, contractors for Memorial Lighthouse, 3;
    for Plattsburgh Memorial, 8.

  Booth, John Henry, member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 218,
        225, 226;
    supervised Plattsburgh Memorial, 6, 119;
    escorted Commissioners and guests to Plattsburgh, 77;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    at dedication of Champlain Memorial Statue, 163;
    Judge, 207;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Booth, Miss Katharine M., unveiled Champlain Memorial Statue at
        Plattsburgh, 163.

  Boston, Site of, fixed by Champlain, 48.

  Boston and Cambridge, Hospitalities extended to members of French
        delegation at, 27.

  Botsford, Samuel Booth, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Bouquet, Ceci, c’est véritablement le, 86.

  Bourbons, The white coated, 128.

  Bourlamaque, M. —— De, forced to withdraw from Isle aux Noix, 231.

  Boynton, Adelbert Wesson, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Bradford, Gerard, Midshipman, of the flotilla, Obligations of
        Commission to, 191.

  Brainerd, Ezra, President of Middlebury College, 209.

  Brazza, Pierre Paul François Camille Savorgnan, Count de, French
        explorer in Africa, 14.

  Brébeuf, Jean de, French explorer, 35.

  British, The red attired, 128.

  British fleet, The, defeated by De Grasse, 59-60.

  British officers, Graves of, at Plattsburgh, visited, 158.

  British regiments commanded by Gen. Amherst, List of, on Tablet, 127.

  Bronze memorial tablet presented to State of New York by the Society
        of Colonial Wars, 121;
    unveiling of, 125-29.
    _See_ Tablet.

  Bronze statue of Champlain by Heber 3, 7;
    description of, 8, 9.

  Brouage, birthplace of Champlain, Arms of, 5;
    keystone from doorway of Champlain’s house in, 32, 33, 34;
    the sleepy town of, 105;
    the poor French boy of, 169.

  Brown, Allen Danvers, President of Norwich University, 209.

  Brown, Rome G., lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Brugère, Général Henri Joseph, President of United States section of
        Franco-American Committee, 91.

  Bryce, James, M. Jusserand on, 37, 38;
    represented Great Britain at Tercentenary in 1909, 52, 158, 187;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    addresses and works of, 188.

  Buckham, James, essayist and poet, born in the Champlain valley, 214.

  Buckham, Matthew Henry, President of University of Vermont, 208.

  Buel, Alexander Woodruff, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Burgoyne, John, General, Inspiring deeds of, 128;
    correspondence of, with William Pitt, 198;
    at Fort Ticonderoga, 232.

  Burke, Edmund, in land controversy, 227.

  Burleigh, Henry Gordon, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Burlington, Celebration at, 38, 52;
    address of Mayor of, at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 142;
    and its bay, compared with Naples, 151-52;
    University of Vermont at, 151;
    a garrisoned post, 233;
    pageant and exercises at, planned, 235.

  Burlington Bay, the Baiæ of our inland sea, 52;
    and Bay of Naples compared, 151.

  _Burlington_, steam cutter, in the flotilla, 191.


  Cady, Dr. Daniel Leavens, Verses of, on Lake Champlain, 81;
    poet of the Tercentenary Exercises at Plattsburgh, 212.

  Canada, owes existence to Champlain, 14;
    once French territory, 60;
    entertains French visitors, 88-90;
    thanks to, by M. Hanotaux, 92;
    officials from, at Champlain Tercentenary, 143;
    found Tercentenary an occasion to speak for international peace,
        147;
    and our Republic have common heritage, 171;
    good will of people of, 189;
    destinies of the United States and, 229;
    England’s acquisition of, by treaty, 231;
    invasion of, by Gens. Schuyler and Montgomery, 234.

  Canadian troops, Presence of, at the Celebration commended and
        appreciated, 187;
    obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Canals, Interoceanic, proposed at early dates, 36n.

  Canes Venatici, The whirlpool nebula in, 21.

  Canfield, Thomas Hawley, “Discovery, navigation, and navigators of
        Lake Champlain,” 197.

  “Caniaderiguarunte,” the “gate of the country,” 227.

  Cannon, Joseph Gurney, favored the Tercentenary, 181.

  Canoe, The birch bark, 7, 81.

  Cantlie, George Stephen, Lt.-Col. in command of Fifth Royal Canadian
        Highlanders, 187.

  Carignan-Salières Regiment, The, at Fort Ste. Anne, 53, 234-35.

  Carillon, French name for Ticonderoga, 102;
    M. Bazin’s impressions of, 103-4;
    house of fortress of, a museum, 104;
    view from, resembles the plain of Pau, 104;
    the Vosges with Retournemer and Longemer, 104.

  Carleton, Sir Guy, defeated at Valcour, 40.

  Carnegie Lyceum, French play at the, 25.

  Carpenter, Matthew Hale, from Champlain valley, 203.

  Cartier, Jacques, 35;
    first of Europeans to see the Green Mountains, 43;
    explorer, 102.

  Cassin, Stephen, Lt.-Commander, voted a gold medal by Congress, 233;
    fort named after, 234.

  Caswell, Lucien B., M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 203.

  Catholic Summer School of America, at Cliff Haven, Reception of
        Commissioners and guests at, 157-58:
    Address by Rev. Father D. J. Hickey, 157-58;
    visits of Presidents and Governors, 157;
    work of the School, 158;
    reply by Governor Dix, 158.

  Catlin, Charles Albert, chemist, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Caughnawaga Indians, Claims of the, from Vermont, for land taken, 248.

  Cedar Beach, summer resort on east shore of Lake, 151.

  Celebration, The, Review of features of, 187-89;
    one of the principal commemorative celebrations of the century,
        188;
    international character of, 189.

  Celts or hand axes, of chipped stone, 252;
    of copper, 258.

  Ceremonial stones, and other problematical objects, 254.

  Chamber of Commerce of Montreal, joins in reception to French
        delegation, 89.

  Chamber of Commerce of Plattsburgh, assisted the Tercentenary
        Commissioners, 119;
    met Commissioners and guests at Bluff Point, 157;
    entertained them at luncheon, 159.

  Chamber of Commerce of State of New York, entertained French
        delegation at luncheon, 59-67:
    Address of welcome by A. B. Hepburn, 59-61;
    reply in French of M. Hanotaux, 61-65;
    address of Count de Chambrun, 65-66;
    remarks of M. Blériot, 66-67;
    addresses by Louis Barthou and Baron D’Estournelles de Constant, 67.

  Chambers, Walter Boughton, member of Committee on Tablet, 125.

  Chambly, Capt. Edward Mott at taking of, 243.

  Chambly, the falls of, Champlain at, 230.

  Chambres de Commerce américaines, M. Hanotaux aux, 65.

  Chambrun, Count Charles de, member of French delegation, 17, 62;
    Address of, at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 65-66;
    Personally represents Prime Minister of France, 66, 75;
    part played by Frenchmen on this continent, 66;
    on friendship between the two Republics, 66, 79.

  Champlain, Samuel, Memorial to, 1-9:
      Description of Memorial Lighthouse to, 3-6;
      Plattsburgh Memorial to, 6-9;
      Statue of, 8;
    Tercentenary tributes to, 13;
    tribute of M. Hanotaux to, 13-14;
    keystone from birthplace of, at banquet, 32, 33;
    tribute of John Finley to, 33;
    checked tortures of Indians upon prisoners, 34;
    Atty.-Gen. Wickersham deems Lighthouse worthy tribute to, 35;
    visited Isthmus of Panama and suggested canal, 36, 137;
    M. Jusserand on Tercentenary Memorial ceremonies to, 37;
    believed in justice to less advanced races, 38-39;
    tribute of Thomas F. Conway to, 40-41, 42-43;
    new continent a revelation to, 47;
    M. Hanotaux on foresight of, 48;
    France joins in honoring, 50;
    central figure of Tercentenary celebration, 53;
    Gov. Mead on, 74;
    L. C. Lafontaine on, 76;
    M. Deschamps describes statue of, on Lighthouse, 81;
    well known in America, 84;
    honest man, 84-85;
    founded Quebec, 89, 230;
    M. Vidal de la Blache on mission of, 95;
    on islands in Lake Champlain, 96, 152;
    tribute of M. Bazin to, 102, 105-106;
    French gratitude for American commemoration of, 109;
    Crown Point Memorial to, unveiled, 134;
    tribute of John M. Thomas to, 136;
    tribute of Gov. Dix to, 137-38;
    tribute of Adjt.-Gen. Tillotson to, 139;
    account of first battle with Iroquois, 144, 230;
    tribute of H. Wallace Knapp to, 164;
    belongs to the world, 165;
    tribute of Gov. Dix to, through vista of three centuries, 165-66;
    Hamilton W. Mabie on, 166;
    tribute of Francis Lynde Stetson to, 168-69;
    Count de Peretti de la Rocca on lessons in life of, 170;
    prophetic vision of, 171;
    tribute of Job E. Hedges to, 172;
    might have written an epic, 227;
    reached and named Lake Champlain, 230.

  Champlain badges, Official souvenir, presented to members of French
        delegation, 17.

  Champlain Canal, nearing completion, 54.

  Champlain Memorial at Crown Point,
    _see_ Lighthouse, Champlain Memorial;
    _and_ Crown Point Forts.

  Champlain Memorial Statue at Plattsburgh, 1;
    description of, 6-9:
      Statue and pedestal, 7;
      inscriptions on, 8;
      sculptor, 8-9;
    invitations to and preparation for the dedication of, 117-19;
    military features of exercises at, 120;
    Commissioners and guests escorted to site of, 159;
    Dedicatory ceremonies of, 163-73:
      Invocation, 163;
      Statute unveiled, 163;
      historic flag used, 163;
      address of H. Wallace Knapp, 163-65;
      address of Gov. Dix, 165-66;
      address by Adjt.-Gen. Tillotson, 166-67;
      address by Francis Lynde Stetson, accepting Memorial, 168-69;
      address by Count de Peretti de la Rocca, 170-71;
      address by John A. Stewart, 171-72;
      address by Job E. Hedges, 172;
      benediction by Rt. Rev. Mgr. Lavelle, 172-73;
    erected by the New York Commission, 186.

  Champlain Memorials, to be turned over to the authorities, 118;
    submitted for approval of the people, 186-87.

  Champlain Park in Plattsburgh, 122.

  Champlain region. Representative men of the, 203-14;
    light on early history of, 240.

  Champlain Tercentenary Celebration, The, 36;
    reviewed by Senator Hill, 51-53:
      Noted guests at, 51;
      five scenes of the drama of, at different points on the Lake,
        52-53;
    glorified not only Champlain but all French heroes, 96;
    international character of, 119;
    reviewed by Robert Roberts, 143;
    made for international peace, 147;
    beautiful weather conditions of, 199.

  Champlain Valley, Historical importance of the, 40;
    Senator Hill on the, 52;
    Lt.-Gov. Conway welcomes French visitors to the, 73;
    Vidal de la Blache on history of the, 94;
    representatives from the, invited, 117;
    people of the, at dedicatory exercises, 119-33;
    eyes of the world upon the, 135;
    future of the, secure, 136;
    should be conserved from commercialism, 139;
    strategic points for safeguarding the, 145;
    pictorial grandeur of the, 151-52;
    progress of humanity in the, 163;
    two memorials in the, 185, 186-87;
    people of, under obligations to speakers at the Celebration, 191;
    maneuvering of troops in, suggestive historically, 191;
    all courtesies shown by people of, appreciated, 193;
    history of, 197-99;
    a thoroughfare of successive nations, 199;
    belongs to history of three great nations, 225;
    Indian, French and English occupation of the, 227;
    disputed grants of land in the, 227-28;
    Revolutionary engagements in the, 228;
    a highway of war and travel, 228, 229;
    destinies decided in, 229;
    the French and English struggle for the, 230-31;
    Treaty of Paris, 231;
    end of storm and stress period in, 232;
    battles of 1814 in the, 233;
    landmarks of the, 233-35.

  Chanler, Lewis Stuyvesant, Lt.-Gov., member of New York Commission,
        225.

  Chansons de filasse, 83.

  Chapman, James Russell, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Chaput, Charles, helped entertain French visitors in Canada, 89.

  Charles V., Galvão proposed Panama canal to, 36n.

  Charlevoix, Pierre François Xavier de, on slave labor and hired
        servants, 39.

  Charts of the region, 198.

  Chazy, Capt. de, killed by the Mohawks, 234.

  Children of the American Revolution, Nathan Beman Chapter of, at
        Plattsburgh Barracks, 79.

  Chimney Point, Small fort at, 145;
    Port Henry overlooks, 151.

  China, Forts of, blown up, but Chinese smile and yield nothing
        essential, 146-47;
    influence of boys of, educated in American colleges, upon, 147.

  Chipman, Henry, Judge, from the Champlain Valley, 207.

  Chipman, Nathaniel, Correspondence of, with Alexander Hamilton, on
        boundary dispute, 210.

  Chittenden, Lucius Eugene, on the struggle for Lake Champlain, 72;
    addresses and public papers of, 197;
    Register of the Treasury under Lincoln, 212;
    library and works of, 212-13.

  Chittenden, Thomas, Governor, State papers of, 209-10.

  Chittendens, Independence and resolution of the, 199.

  Choiseul-Praslin, Marie Jean Baptiste Gaston, Duc de, member of the
        French delegation, 17, 62.

  Churchill, John Charles, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Citizens’ Association of Montreal joined in reception, 89.

  Civilization, Contributions of France to, 21.

  Civilization, American, M. Hanotaux on characteristics of, 46, 48-49;
    something of France in, 50;
    light of, symbolized, 51, 64, 72-73, 186;
    seeds of, sown, 60;
    Champlain pioneer of, 166.

  Clark, Champ, Speaker of the House, from the banks of the Missouri,
        33.

  Clark, Elroy Newton, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Clark, John Cheeseman, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Clark, William Andrews, entertained French delegation and the
        Commissions, 26;
    at banquet, 32;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Clarke, George L., lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  “Clear Fountain, The,” romance from Normandy, 83.

  _Clermont_, The, on the Hudson, 233.

  Cliff Haven, Catholic Summer School at, visited by Commissioners and
        guests, 157-58.

  Clinton, George, Governor, Remains of, transferred to Kingston, 183;
    State papers of, 209.

  Coins of France, Figure of woman sowing on, 60.

  Collamer, Jacob, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  College of the City of New York, French plays by students of the, 25.

  Colonists, French and English, Diplomatic relations between, 229.

  Colonists, The Puritan, founded settlements, were not explorers, 97.

  Colony, Any, on American continent, must be self-supporting, 48.

  Columbia University, once owned Ticonderoga, 95.

  Comité France-Amérique, assumed the procuring of the Rodin bust of
        “La France,” 13-14;
    American branches of the, received the French delegation, 45;
    gift of the French due to efforts of the, 62;
    to develop pleasant relations between the two countries, 64;
    friendship animates the, 75-76;
    M. Poincaré on work of the, 93;
    toast to the, 93;
    delegates of the, impressed with the United States, 142.

  Commemorations, Count de Peretti de la Rocca on the, 142.

  Comment in appreciation of the visit of the French delegation, and
        honors conferred [by HENRY W. HILL], 109-11.

  Commerce, M. Hanotaux on, 63-64.

  Committee of France-America,
    _see_ Comité France-Amérique.

  Committee on Foreign Affairs, Members of, favoring the Tercentenary,
        179;
    Joint Resolution reported by, 180;
    Report of, 180.

  Committee on Foreign Affairs, Report of, by D. J. Foster, 223-36:
    Joint resolution of Vermont Legislature, 223-24;
    concurrent resolution of New York Legislature, 224;
    recommendation of N. Y. Commission, 225;
    action of New York Legislature, 225;
    of Vermont Legislature, 226;
    facts warranting federal appropriation, 226-36:
      Lake Champlain the battle ground of Algonquins, Hurons and
        Iroquois, 226-27, 230;
      Indian, French and English occupation of the valley, 227;
      disputed grants of lands, 227-28;
      battles of the Revolution, 228;
      a highway of war and travel, 228;
      extract from Dr. Cutting’s poem, 228;
      historic importance of the valley, 229;
      Champlain’s battle with the Iroquois, 230;
      French and English struggle for the valley, 230-31;
      the Treaty of Paris, 231;
      Ethan Allen and Ticonderoga, 231-32;
      Arnold’s naval battle, 232;
      end of storm and stress period, 232;
      battles of 1814, 233;
      landmarks of the valley, 233-35;
      Indian pageants provided for, 235;
      importance of participation by the United States Government,
        235-36;
      recommendation of passage of resolution, 236.

  Compagnie de la Nouvelle France, La, Arms of, on Memorial Lighthouse,
        5.

  Compagnie Générale Transatlantique, La, 16, 17;
     gave reception and dinner to the French delegates, 27.

  Conant, Thomas Jefferson, Works of, 210.

  Conclusion of the work of the Commission, 217-18.

  Confederacy of the Six Nations, The, 247.

  Congo, Future cities on the, 14.

  Congress voted medals to commissioned officers of Macdonough’s fleet,
        233.

  Congressional Library visited by French delegation, 27.

  Congressional representation of the Champlain valley, 204-6.

  Connecticut Historical Society, Collections of the, 198.

  Conquistadores, The, sought gold alone, 46;
    of the ideal, 47;
    the new, of labor, 48;
    no gatherings of many peoples to honor the, 164.

  Contents, Table of, v-viii.

  “Continental, Not worth a,” origin of expression, 59.

  Converse, John Heman, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Conway, Thomas Franklin, Lt.-Gov., guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet,
        31;
    address at banquet, 40-43:
      Historical importance of the Champlain valley, 40;
      tribute to Champlain, 41;
      alliance of Iroquois and English overthrew French dominion, 41;
      welcome of New York State to French guests, 42-43;
      appreciation of gift, 43;
    met Commissioners and guests at Port Henry, 72;
    remarks of, at Crown Point exercises, 73;
    lawyer, native of Champlain valley, 207.

  Cook, Rev. Joseph, on the struggle for Lake Champlain, 72;
    “Historical address at the centennial anniversary of the settlement
        of Ticonderoga,” 197-98, 212;
    Lectures of, 212.

  Copper, Implements and ornaments of, found, 258.

  Cormon, Fernand, member of the French delegation, 16, 44, 190;
    response of, to welcome at French Institute, 26;
    impressed with the Memorial Lighthouse, 72;
    captivated by beauty of Lake Champlain, 82.

  Cormon, Mlle. Madeline, member of the French delegation, 17.

  Corneille, Pierre, M. Hanotaux on likeness of Champlain to, 84.

  Cornwallis, General Charles, Defeat of, at Yorktown, 59-60.

  Correspondence between Colonial Governors and William Pitt, 198.

  Cortez, Hernando, No gatherings of many peoples to honor, 164.

  Country, our, M. Hanotaux on appearance of, 46;
    its resemblance to European countries, 47.

  Coureurs des bois, 33.

  _Courrier des États-Unis_, Address of Paul Vidal de la Blache in,
        94-97.

  Cowles, Calvin Duvall, Colonel, Commandant at Plattsburgh Barracks,
        77, 119;
    and staff presented to French visitors, 77;
    M. Deschamps on, 86;
    invited to the dedications, 117;
    ordered review of Fifth Infantry, 122, 158;
    and Regiment escorted Commissioners and guests to site of Champlain
        Statue, 122, 159;
    obligations of Commissioners to, 191.

  “Creek, The,” north of Plattsburgh, Pottery fireplaces found near,
        256.

  Crèvecœur, Pierre Boucher de, helped entertain French visitors in
        Canada, 89.

  Croce, Benedetto, Theory of æsthetics of, interpreted by H. W. Hill,
        20.

  Crockett, Walter Hill, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 224, 226;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    “History of Lake Champlain,” 198.

  Crown Point, Fall of, 35;
    ruined forts at, 52;
    Vidal de la Blache on early conflicts at, 95;
    on exercises at, 95;
    historical incidents in neighborhood of, 143-44, 145;
    Seth Warner captured garrison at, 146, 232;
    Burgoyne forced abandonment of, 232;
    English forts at, 239-40;
    rock inscription at, 240;
    _Pointe de la Couronne_, 240.

  Crown Point Forts, Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at, 1, 2, 3, 13, 51,
        54, 60;
    Commissioners and French delegation at, 72-77:
      Opening address of H. Wallace Knapp at formal exercises, 73;
      remarks of Lieut.-Gov. Conway, 73;
      welcome by Gov. Mead, 74;
      address of Gabriel Hanotaux, 74-76;
      gift received by Commissioner Lafontaine, 76;
      visitors see ruins of forts, 76;
      new discoveries about old French fort, 76-77:
    Report of exercises at, by Gaston Deschamps, 80, 83-85;
    M. Bazin on Americans at exercises at, 104-5;
    military features of dedicatory exercises at, 121;
    site of, donated to New York State by Witherbee, Sherman & Co., 151.

  Crown Point Forts, Dedicatory ceremonies of Champlain Memorial
        Lighthouse at, 133-47.
    For analysis _see_ Lighthouse, Champlain Memorial.

  Crown Point Memorial, Formal invitations to dedication of, 117-18;
    arrangements for dedication of, 119.
    _See also_ Lighthouse, Champlain Memorial.

  Crown Point Reservation, Forts included in the, 76;
    Tablet at Fort Amherst in, 125;
    New York Historical Association custodians of, 128;
    Memorial on land adjacent to, 135.

  Cruelties, Indian, restrained by Champlain, 34-35.

  Culture and refinement of people of the Champlain valley, 209, 210,
        214.

  Cummings, Dr. William Andrew Easton, Papers by, 214.

  Cutting, Sewall Sylvester, Poem “Lake Champlain,” 152, 228.


  D. A. R., Saranac Chapter of the, at Plattsburgh Barracks, 79.

  Dal Piaz, John, member of the French delegation, 17;
    speaker at dinner on steamship _France_, 27.

  Dandurand, Raoul, President of Franco-American Committee of Canada,
        89;
    bade French delegation “bon voyage,” 90;
    on relations of Canada and United States, 93;
    insignia of Legion of Honor conferred on, 93.

  Dartmouth, George Legge, 3rd Earl of, in land controversies, 227.

  Davidson, Julian Oliver, “The Battle of Lake Champlain” painted by,
        159.

  Davidson, Lucretia Maria, poetess, from the Champlain valley, 211.

  Davis, Charles, General, at banquet at Waldorf-Astoria, 32.

  De Jean, Viscount, Secretary of the French Embassy, welcomed the
        French delegation, 16;
    present at the banquet, 32;
    at dock to bid farewell to French delegation, 90.

  De la Blache, _see_ Vidal de la Blache.

  De la Place, Capt. William, English officer at Ticonderoga, Ethan
        Allen’s reply to, 232.

  De Liniers, Jacques Antoine Marie, French explorer, 13.

  Decoration of the valley pottery, 256.

  Dedicatory ceremonies [HENRY W. HILL], 113-73:
    I. Preparation for dedicatory ceremonies including military
            features, 115-22;
       Crown Point Forts, 121;
       Plattsburgh, 122.
    II. Unveiling tablet at the English Fort, 123-29;
        Report of the Tablet Committee, 125-27;
        Address of acceptance, by J. A. Holden, 128-29.
    III. Dedicatory ceremonies of Champlain Memorial Lighthouse, 131-47.
    IV. Sail down the Lake to Bluff Point, 149-53;
        Champlain Hotel, July 6, 1912, 153.
    V. The Summer School; Review at Plattsburgh Barracks; Reception at
             Plattsburgh, 155-59.
    VI. Dedicatory ceremonies of the Champlain Memorial Statue at
             Plattsburgh, July 6, 1912, 161-73.

  Democracies, Problem of government of great, by themselves, 49.

  Democracy, The American and the French, M. Hanotaux on, 75-76.

  “Democracy and beauty,” President Eliot on, 140.

  Démocraties, Deux grandes, pensent et agissent, à l’unisson, 62;
    sont faites pour s’aimer, se comprendre, et s’unir, 65.

  Depew, Chauncey Mitchell, moved adoption of Joint Resolution, 181.

  DESCHAMPS, CHARLES PIERRE GASTON NAPOLÉON, member of French
        delegation representing _Le Temps_, 17;
    Report of exercises at Crown Point and Plattsburgh by, in _Le
        Temps_, 80-86:
      Greeting at Port Henry, 80;
      tribute to Walter C. Witherbee, 80;
      poets on Champlain, 81;
      description of statue of Champlain, 81;
      his lake seen from the steamer, 81-82;
      old French songs still exist in French-Canadian villages, 82-83;
      steamer stops before Memorial Lighthouse, 83;
      impressions at unveiling of bust, 84-85;
      address of M. Hanotaux, 84;
      of governors of New York and Vermont, 84-85;
      visits ruins of Fort Frédéric, 85;
      experiences at Plattsburgh, 85-86;
      on Col. Cowles, 86;
      the welcome at St. Jean, Canada, 86;
    beauty of style of, 110.

  Dewey, Davis Rich, Professor, from the Champlain valley, 208;
    works of, on Economics, 212.

  Dewey, George, Admiral, a native of the Champlain valley, 208.

  Dewey, John, Professor, from the Champlain valley, 208;
    works of, on Psychology, 212.

  Dickinson, Jacob McGavock, Secretary of War, Obligations of
        Commissions to, 191.

  Dieskau, Ludwig August, Baron von, occupied Crown Point, 231.

  Dillingham, William Paul, aided in securing Federal co-operation, 181.

  Dillon, McLellan and Beadel, architects of Memorial Lighthouse, 2;
    description of Plattsburgh Memorial, 6-8;
    description of bust “La France,” 18.

  Dinner in Paris to French delegation on its return, 91-93:
    Prominent guests, 91-92;
    opening remarks of M. Poincaré, 92;
    address of Gabriel Hanotaux, 92-93;
    remarks of Senator Dandurand, 93;
    addresses of Louis Barthou, M. Puga-Borne, Myron T. Herrick and M.
        Poincaré, 93.

  Discoidal stones rare in Champlain valley, 254-55.

  Dix, John Alden, Governor, approved Bill for erection of permanent
        memorials, 1;
    member of New York Commission, 4, 8;
    and staff, at Crown Point and Plattsburgh, 120;
    reviewed the Fifth Infantry, U. S. A., 122;
    at dedication of Tablet, 125;
    address at, 126;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    address accepting Memorial and transferring it to United States,
        136-38:
      Tribute to Champlain, 137-38;
      to France, 138;
    Memorial bequeathed to Federal Government, 138;
    visited Cliff Haven Summer School, 157;
    responded to address of welcome, 158;
    salute in honor of, at Plattsburgh Barracks, 158;
    address at dedication of Champlain Statue, 165-66:
      Statue as seen through vista of three centuries, 165;
      tribute to Champlain, 166;
      quotes H. W. Mabie on, 166;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  “Documentary history of the State of New York,” 198.

  Documents relating to the region, 198.

  “Documents relative to the colonial history of the State of New
        York,” 198.

  “_Dolphin_,” U. S. Str., took French delegation to Mount Vernon, 26.

  Dominy, Alonson Tabor, member of New York Commission, Death of, 182,
        225.

  Donatello, Rodin and, 19-20.

  “Door of the country,” The, 229, 233.

  Douglas, Stephen Arnold, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Downie, George, Captain, commander of British fleet on Lake
        Champlain, 40, 52;
    grave of, at Plattsburgh visited, 158;
    defeated by Macdonough, 233.

  Draper, Andrew Sloan, invited to dedications, 117.

  Draper, William Henry, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Dream of Adjt.-Gen. Tillotson about Champlain Memorial Lighthouse,
        139.

  Drills and scrapers of chipped stone, 251.

  Driscoll, Michael Edward, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Du Luth, Daniel Greysolon, Homage to, 96.

  Dubost, Antonin, on unbroken amity between France and the United
        States, 94.

  Ducreux, François, Father, made map of Champlain region, 248.

  Dumas, Guillaume Matthieu, Count, Portrait of, in Independence Hall,
        28.

  Dunton, Walter Chipman, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Duret, Théodore, on persecution of creative artists, 19.

  Dwight, John Willard, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Dwyer, Rev. John William, pronounced benediction at dedication of
        Lighthouse, 147.


  Earthenware of the Champlain valley, 255-56.

  Edgerton, Joseph Ketchum, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Edison, Thomas Alva, Admiration of Frenchmen for, 67.

  Edmunds, George Franklin, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Educational institutions, 208-9.

  Educators, Prominent, 208-9.

  Eiffel Tower, Flag used on, 163.

  Eliot, Charles William, on Democracy and beauty, 140.

  Ellsworth, Perry Green, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Embassies, Members of British and French, invited to dedications, 117.

  England, Century of peace between America, France and, 164.

  England and France, Struggles between, for the New World, 41, 94, 145.

  England’s colonial policy decided by what occurred in the Champlain
        valley, 229.

  English and “Americans of the Union,” Strife between, 94, 146.

  English and French, Strife between, 41, 94, 145.

  English forces, Alliance of the Iroquois with the, 41, 145.

  English Forts, erected by General Amherst, 52, 145;
    visitors shown ruins of, 76;
    discoveries made at, 76-77;
    Tablet unveiled at, 121;
    Report of Tablet Committee, 125-26;
    General Amherst’s reports on the construction of the, 239-40.

  Essex, summer resort on west shore of Lake, 151.

  Estournelles de Constant, Paul Henri Benjamin, Baron d’, member of
        French delegation, 16, 44;
    introduced members of delegation to members of New York Commission,
        17;
    at luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    address of, at Waldorf-Astoria dinner, 50;
    well known advocate of International Peace, 50-51;
    speaker at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 67;
    eloquence of, 109-10.

  Ethan Allen Club entertained the Preliminary Champlain Commission,
        192.

  Evarts, Jeremiah, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Events occurring prior to 1783, Foreign material relating to, 198.

  Explorers, early French, Pres. Finley on the, 33, 35;
    treatment of natives by the, 39;
    hardihood of the, 40;
    heroism of the, 41-42;
    M. Hanotaux on the, 46-48;
    sowed the seeds of civilization, 60;
    Champlain le plus glorieux parmi, 64;
    _les volontaires de la foi_, 64;
    M. Bazin on the, 104.

  _Exposition du Système du Monde_ (P. S. de Laplace), 21.

  Eyre, Edmund, Lt.-Col., ordered to trace ground for a fort, 239.


  Faguet, Paul, presided at dinner given on the _France_ to the
        Commissions and the French delegation, 27;
    invited to dedications, 117.

  Fallières, Clément Armand, President of France, raising funds to
        purchase bust, 13, 186;
    generosity of, and of French people, 53;
    headed subscription list, 62, 75;
    honors conferred by, on members of the Commission and other
        Americans, 110-11.

  Falls of Montmorency visited by the French delegation, 89.

  Families, Old French, represented in the delegation, 17, 44, 62, 75.

  Farnham, Charles Cyrus, lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Fassett, Jacob Sloat, member of Committee on Foreign Affairs, 179.

  Fath, Edward Arthur, on nebulæ, 21.

  Father of the aborigines, Champlain, 102.

  Federal appropriation, Facts warranting a, 226-36.

  Federal co-operation and assistance rendered by Senators of the
        United States, Representatives in Congress and others [by
        HENRY W. HILL], 179-82:
    Joint Resolution from Committee on Foreign Affairs, 179-80;
    D. J. Foster on, 180;
    passed by Senate and approved by Pres. Roosevelt, 181;
    death of prominent friends of the Tercentenary, 181-82.

  Federal Government, Authorization of, 135;
    Memorial Lighthouse bequeathed to, 138.

  Ferrin, William Nelson, President of Pacific University, 208.

  Ferris, Orange, M. C., born in Champlain valley, 206.

  Fifteenth U. S. Cavalry, Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Fifth Royal Canadian Highlanders, Lt.-Col. G. S. Cantlie commanding,
        at the Celebration, 187.

  Fifth U. S. Infantry, at Plattsburgh Barracks, 77, 85;
    review of the, 122, 158;
    roster of officers of, 122;
    escorted Commissioners and guests to site of the Champlain Statue,
        122, 159;
    fired salute at unveiling, 163;
    obligations of the Commission to, 191.

  Fifth U. S. Infantry Band, Music by, at dedicatory ceremonies, 122,
        163.

  _Figaro, Le_, Appeal to French people for funds in columns of, 13-16;
    represented by M. Régis Gignoux, 17.

  Financial Report of New York Commission to March 26, 1912, submitted
        to the Legislature, 1.

  Financial statement, 263.

  Fine Arts Academy of France, M. Fernand Cormon the President of the,
        17, 26.

  FINLEY, JOHN HUSTON, toastmaster at the Waldorf-Astoria
        banquet, 31;
    articles by, on “The French in the Heart of America,” 32;
    Address of, at banquet, 33-34:
      Pilgrimage of, to Champlain’s birthplace, 33;
      brought keystone from door of Champlain’s home, which speaks for
        him, 33;
      the heads of three branches of our government from valleys
        discovered by the French, 33-34;
      toast to Pres. Taft, 34;
      presented Attorney-General Wickersham, 34;
    introduced Ambassador Jusserand, 37;
    M. Jusserand on the Sorbonne lectures of, 38;
    remarks of, introducing Lieut. Gov. Conway, 40;
    near accident on Niagara River, 40;
    called up Gov. of Vermont, 43;
    remarks of, introducing Mayor Gaynor, 43;
    presented the French delegation, 44;
    presented Louis Barthou, 50;
    presented Baron d’Estournelles de Constant, 50;
    presented Senator Henry W. Hill, 51;
    made a Knight in the Legion of Honor, 111;
    Harvard Exchange Lecturer at French universities, 111;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  “Fire-water,” Sale of, to natives, opposed, 39.

  First Infantry, N. G. Vt., Company “M.” at Crown Point Forts, 121,
        125.

  Fish, Frank Leslie, member of the Vermont Commission, 5, 226;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Fisk, Hon. and Mrs. Nelson Wilbur, Acknowledgment of entertainment of
        Preliminary Commission by, at Isle la Motte, 192.

  Fitch’s, Col., Connecticut Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Fitzgerald, John Joseph, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Five Academies, Address of M. Vidal de la Blache at annual meeting
        of the, 94.

  Five Nations, The, represented in the Long House of the Iroquois, 41.

  Flag, Historic, used to drape the Champlain Statue, 163.

  Flagg, Azariah Cutting, Sec. of State and State Comptroller, from the
        Champlain valley, 206.

  Flags at Crown Point Forts, René Bazin on what they said, 105.

  Flags at Fort Carillon, 103-4;
    standards of the regiments of France represented in the battle, 103.

  Flags of United States and France entwined, 31, 59;
    on Memorial Lighthouse, 75;
    at Plattsburgh, 77;
    at Carillon, 103-4.

  Fleur-de-lis flag, The ancient, of France, 71.

  Florida, a Spanish province, 60.

  Flotilla, The, under command of Lt. G. W. Steele, Jr., 191.

  Foley, James Aloysius, introduced Bill for Memorials in Assembly, 1;
    member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 225, 226;
    supervised the Plattsburgh Memorial, 6;
    at dock to bid farewell to French delegation, 90;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    member of the Preliminary Commission, 218.

  Folk songs, French, Airs of, played, 72, 82;
    preserved among the Canadian French, 83.

  Follett, John Fassett, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Foote, Solomon, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Foote, Wallace Turner, Jr., M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  “Forbé’s” (17th) Regiment of Foot, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Forbes, Edgar Allen, “Land of the White Helmet,” 39.

  Forces, The land, at Battle of Yorktown, 54, 59;
    at Fort Carillon, 102.

  Foreign Governments, Obligations to, acknowledged by the Commission,
        189.

  Fort Amherst, Tablet placed on wall of Old Barracks at, to
        commemorate erection of, 125-27;
    enormous expense of building, 145;
    never officially so named, 240.

  “Fort Blunder,” near Rouse’s Point, 235.

  Fort Carillon at Ticonderoga, 52;
    Percy MacKaye on the heroic defenders of, 81;
    M. Hanotaux on, 92;
    M. Bazin on the battle at, 102-4;
    completed in 1756, 145, 227, 231.

  Fort Cassin, at mouth of Otter Creek, 234.

  Fort Frédéric, erected by the French in 1731, 52, 145, 227, 230, 239;
    ruins of, shown to French visitors, 76;
    Mrs. Witherbee’s discoveries at, 76-77;
    M. Deschamps on visit to, 85;
    capture of, commemorated by Tablet, 126, 127;
    abandoned by the French, 145;
    largest of early settlements at, 145;
    territory claimed by French commandant of, 230;
    enlarged, 230.

  Fort Montgomery, called “Fort Blunder,” near Rouse’s Point, 235.

  Fort Oswego, 240.

  Fort Pittsburgh, 240.

  Fort St. Frédéric, _see_ Fort Frédéric.

  Fort Ste. Anne on Isle La Motte, 52, 227, 233;
    became a Jesuit mission station, 234.

  Fort Stanwix, 240.

  Fort Ticonderoga, owned by S. H. P. Pell, 71, 103;
    strategic importance of, 72;
    work of restoration at, 95, 103;
    loss of the “Black Watch” at, 129;
    capture of, by Ethan Allen, 145-46, 231-32.

  Fortress of Crown Point, Gen. Amherst on the, 240.

  Foss, Eugene Noble, Governor, received the French delegation, 27;
    from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Foss, George Edmund, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Foster, David Johnson, reported Joint Resolution from Committee on
        Foreign Affairs, 179, 223;
    remarks of, 180;
    efforts of, for Federal co-operation, 182;
    death of, 182;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191;
    Report of Committee, 223-36.

  Founder and originator, Champlain both, 13-14.

  Founders, Devotion to the memory of the, 50.

  Fouquet House in Plattsburgh, Luncheon at the, 159.

  _Fourberies de Scapin, Les_ (Molière), performed by students of
        College of City of New York, 25.

  Fox Island granite used for Memorial Lighthouse, 3.

  France, Cordial relations between America and, 13, 42, 45;
    hope of Champlain for new world dominions for, 13-14;
    duty of, towards Champlain Memorials, 14, 15-16;
    Rodin’s bust designed to symbolize, 18, 74;
    and the progress of civilization, 20;
    the country of science and art, 21;
    opened up American continent to settlers, 21, 32;
    intellectual expansion of, in the United States, 25;
    struggle between England and, in the new world, 41;
    Mayor Gaynor on women of, 43-44;
    joins in honoring Champlain, 49-50;
    debt of America to, 59-60, 96;
    flags of, 59, 71, 103-4;
    sows while others reap, 60;
    territory of, in America, 60;
    stand of, at Ticonderoga no mistake, 72;
    delegation represents all of, 74;
    image depicts, as Frenchmen see her, 74-75;
    thanks those who remember, 74-75;
    American commemorative monuments to, 75;
    honored in discourses of Governors of New York and Vermont, 84-85;
    closer relations between America and, 90;
    Jefferson on, 138;
    salutation of Mayor Roberts to La Belle, 143;
    found Champlain Tercentenary an occasion to speak for international
        peace, 147;
    century of peace between England, America and, 164;
    Memorial to son of, who represents Frenchmen as we know them, 165.

  France, colonial empire of, M. Jusserand on the, 39.

  France, Government of, invited to participate in Champlain
        Tercentenary, 180.

  France of time of Louis XIII, Arms of, on base of Memorial
        Lighthouse, 5.

  “France, La,” Bust of, by Rodin, 3;
    appeal of Gabriel Hanotaux to French people to secure the, 13-16;
    inscription on, 17;
    description of, 18;
    allegorical interpretation of, by H. W. HILL, 18-21;
    acceptance of, by Attorney-General Wickersham, 3, 7;
    M. Jusserand on, 39;
    Conway on, 40;
    formal presentation of, to the Commissions, 44-50;
    influence of, when placed on Lighthouse, 54-55;
    A. B. Hepburn on, 60;
    seal of the mutual regard of two nations, 62, 165;
    permanent location of, on Lighthouse chosen, 73;
    a sign of gratitude, 74, 165;
    represents France as she is, 74-75;
    a souvenir of French gratitude, 75;
    accepted for the Commissions by L. C. Lafontaine, 76;
    unveiling of, described by M. Deschamps, 84-85;
    brought from France on ship _La France_, 93;
    M. Bazin on “La France” at Fort Carillon, 103-4;
    M. Peretti de la Rocca on, 142;
    renewed thanks for, 190.

  _France_, Steamship, brought over the French delegation, 16, 45, 65,
        93;
    banquet given on board, 27.

  Francis, Rev. Lewis, pronounced Invocation at Lighthouse dedication,
        134.

  Franco-American Committee, _see_ Comité France-Amérique.

  Franco-American Committee of Canada gave luncheon, 89.

  Franco-American Institute, The, welcomed the French delegation, 16.

  Franklin, Benjamin, Heber’s statue of, 2;
    appeals of, responded to by French people, 53.

  Frawley, James Joseph, Chairman of Senate Finance Committee, member
        of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 218, 226;
    in charge of Memorial Bill in the Senate, 1.

  “French, The, in the heart of America,” by John H. Finley, 32.

  French America, A, the dream of Champlain, 14.

  French and Algonquins against English and Iroquois, 145.

  French Canadians at Crown Point exercises, 95.

  French colonization in America, John H. Finley’s interest in, 111.

  French commemorations in the United States, 14.

  French delegation, The, to deliver Rodin’s bronze of “La France,” 1,
        15;
    welcomed in New York, 16;
    the personnel of, 16-17, 37, 44, 61, 62, 75, 78;
    the mission of, 17-18, 190;
    social functions and hospitalities extended to, 23-28:
      received at City Hall by Mayor Gaynor, 25;
      luncheon to, at Metropolitan Club, 25;
      visited Loan Exhibition of the French Institute, 26;
      entertained by Senator Clark, 26;
      visited Washington and Mount Vernon, 26-27;
      reception and dinner at the French Embassy, 26-27;
      reception at National Press Club, 27;
      luncheon at the White House, 27;
      dinner to, on board the _France_, 27;
      some members entertained in Boston and Cambridge, 27;
      others in Philadelphia, 27-28;
    banquet to, at the Waldorf-Astoria, 31-55, 118;
    tribute of Atty.-Gen. Wickersham to, 36-37;
    M. Jusserand on, 38;
    welcomed to New York State by Thomas F. Conway, 42-43;
    Mayor Gaynor on, 43;
    introduced by Pres. Finley, 44;
    M. Hanotaux on mission of, 44-45, 50;
    thanks to, by H. W. Hill, 53, 55;
    entertained by the Chamber of Commerce of New York State, 59-67;
    M. Hanotaux on personnel of, 62;
    entertained at Fort Ticonderoga, 71-72;
    breakfast with Mr. and Mrs. S. H. P. Pell, 71;
    examined the ruins, 71-72;
    trip to Crown Point Forts, 72;
    suggested permanent location on the Memorial for “La France,” 73;
    Lt.-Gov. Conway’s welcome to, 73;
    greeting to, from Gov. Mead, 74;
    M. Hanotaux’ presentation address in behalf of, 74-76;
    Commissioner Lafontaine’s remarks to, accepting their gift “La
        France,” 76;
    shown the old forts and recent discoveries at, 76-77;
    welcomed at Plattsburgh, 77;
    reception at Plattsburgh Barracks, 77-80:
      Address of Hon. V. F. Boire, 78-79;
      replies by members of delegation, 79;
      remarks of Mrs. G. F. Tuttle, 79-80;
      left for Montreal, 80;
    M. Deschamps on, 82;
    reception and banquet at Montreal, 89;
    luncheon by Franco-American Committee of Canada, 89;
    visit Quebec, 89;
    hosts of, in Canada, 89;
    met by Senator Hill at Niagara Falls, 90;
    entertained by General F. V. Greene, 90;
    “bon voyage” to, on _La Provence_, 90;
    pleased at reception in this country, 91;
    dinner given to, in Paris on return to France, 91-93;
    guests at, 91-92;
    experiences of, reviewed by M. Gabriel Hanotaux, 92-93;
    reception to, by Mr. and Mrs. Myron T. Herrick, 93-94;
    M. Vidal de la Blache on journey of, 94-97;
    mission of deeper import than mere presentation of bust, 109;
    comment in appreciation of visit of, 109-10, 190;
    Commission grateful to all who helped to entertain the, 192.

  French Embassy at Washington, Reception and dinner at the, 26, 27.

  French fleet, The, under De Grasse, 59-60.

  French Institute in the United States, Loan Exhibit of the, 25, 26.

  French literature, M. Hanotaux on, 91.

  French names, Illustrious, in history of America, 35.

  French officers, Bodies of, found at Fort Carillon, 103.

  French Panama Canal Company, Interests of, purchased, 36.

  French people, Friendship and good will of, 2, 13, 21, 25, 31, 36,
        37, 53, 54, 60, 64-65, 66, 73, 79, 94, 109, 111, 138, 142, 170,
        188.

  French private soldiers and sailors, Monument to, at Annapolis, 142.

  French Republic, Acts of friendship towards, the, 91.

  French speaking and English speaking peoples, One hundredth
        anniversary of last war between, 78-79.

  French supremacy passed from Lake Champlain, 145.

  French trade, M. G. Hanotaux on, 90-91.

  Frenchmen played decisive part in America, 66;
    prophetic vision of, made possible powerful unity of United States,
        97.

  Friends of the project remembered, 182.

  Frontenac, Louis de Buade, Count, French explorer, 35, 102.

  Fuller, Paul, spoke in French at luncheon at Metropolitan Club,
        25-26.

  Fuller, Paul, Jr., Secretary of Franco-American Committee, 16;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Fulton, Robert, Admiration of Frenchmen for, 67.


  Gage’s, 80th (Light Armed), Regiment of Foot, under Gen. Amherst, 127;
    fort built by, 239.

  Galvão, Antonio, suggested canal across Isthmus of Panama, 36n.

  Garfielde, Selucius, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Gateway of the Nation, The, Ticonderoga, 52, 72.

  Gay, ——, Col., Edward Mott became Major in regiment under, 244.

  Gaynor, William Jay, Mayor of New York City, received the French
        delegates, 25;
    at luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31;
    address of, at banquet, 43-44;
    willing to say nothing and write a letter, 43;
    economy of the woman of France should be imitated, 44.

  George II, Salutes at English Forts in honor of birthday of, 239-40.

  George V, Toast to, at Paris dinner, 93.

  Germain, ——, Capt. Régiment des Gardes de la Reine, Inscription to,
        on the Germain redoubt, 103.

  Germain Redoubt, at Fort Ticonderoga, 71;
    inscription on, 103;
    Commission entertained by Howland Pell at, 193.

  Gibbons, James, Cardinal, on our debt to France, 97.

  Gifford, James Meacham, lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Gignoux, Régis, member of French delegation, 17.

  Gilbert, John Ingersoll, native of the Champlain valley, 206.

  Girard, Antoine Charles, member of French delegation, 17;
    represented commerce and industries, 109.

  Girard, Mlle. Valentine, member of the French delegation, 17.

  Glacier mill discovered near English Forts, 77.

  Gold, Early explorers sought for, alone, 46-48;
    the lure of, 47;
    of natural wealth, 48.

  Gómara, Francisco Lopez de, urged an Isthmian canal upon Philip II,
        36n.

  Goodell, Constans Liberty, D.D., from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Goodrich, John Ellsworth, D.D., Works of, 211.

  Gorgets, and other puzzling stone objects, 254.

  Gouel, Roger, member of French delegation, 17.

  Gouges, of chipped stone, found in valley, 252;
    of copper, 258.

  Gouin, Sir Lomer, represented Province of Quebec at Champlain
        Tercentenary, 52, 187;
    helped entertain French visitors in Canada, 89;
    addresses of, 189.

  Governor-General’s Footguards, Lt.-Col. D. R. Street commanding, at
        the Celebration, 187.

  Governors, Colonial, Correspondence of, with William Pitt, 198.

  Governors and Legislatures, Support and co-operation of, acknowledged
        by Commissioners, 218.

  Grabau, Rev. Hubert Pierre Le Febvre, Invocation at dedication of
        Champlain Memorial Statue, 163.

  Grady, Thomas F., Death of Senator, 182.

  Grand Isle, 96.

  Grand Isle County, The bard of, 152.

  Grants, French seigniorial, Few occupations under, 227.

  Grasse, François Joseph Paul, Count de, commander of French fleet,
        aided the colonies, 54, 59-60.

  Great Britain, Government of, invited to participate in Champlain
        Tercentenary, 180.

  Great Britain, War between, and France, 145;
    and American colonies, 145;
    found Champlain Tercentenary an occasion to speak for international
        peace, 147.

  “Green Mountain Boys,” invaded shore of Lake Champlain, 138;
    under Ethan Allen captured Ticonderoga, 145-46;
    Allen’s address to, 146.

  Green Mountain State, People of, welcome the French delegation, 74.

  Green Mountains, Ancient French name of, given to State, 82;
    Vidal de la Blache on the, 95;
    seen from Lake Champlain, 153;
    as seen from New York State, 167.

  Greene, Gen. Francis Vinton, entertained French visitors at Niagara
        Falls, 90.

  Grenadier Fort, at Crown Point, 239.

  Grinnell, Josiah Bushnell, from Champlain valley, 203.

  Guests, specially invited to dedicatory ceremonies, Lists of, 117-18;
    steamer _Ticonderoga_ chartered to carry, 119-20.


  Hale, Chandler, met French delegates in Washington, 26.

  Hale, Matthew, native of the Champlain valley, 206.

  Hale, Robert Safford, from the Champlain valley, 203;
    Member of Congress, 205.

  Hall, Benjamin Elihu, lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Hall, Hiland, “History of Vermont,” 197.

  Hamilton, Alexander, Correspondence of, with Nathaniel Chipman, on
        boundary dispute, 210.

  Hammers, Stone, found in numbers, 252-53.

  Hammond, John, Colonel, born in the Champlain valley, 208.

  Hammond, John, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 206.

  Hand, Augustus Cincinnatus, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Hand, Richard Lockhart, native of the Champlain valley, 206.

  Hand, Samuel, Judge of the Court of Appeals, born in the Champlain
        valley, 207.

  Handiwork, Difficulty of distinguishing Algonkian from Iroquoian,
        250, 256-57.

  HANOTAUX, ALBERT AUGUSTE GABRIEL, head of French delegation,
          1, 16, 38;
    Appeal of, to French people for funds to procure the Rodin bust,
          13-16:
      Tribute to Champlain, 13-14;
      French commemorations in the United States, 14;
      request that France contribute Rodin’s bust of “La France” to the
          Lighthouse Memorial, 15;
      appeal for funds, 16;
    on “La France,” 18;
    reply to Mayor Gaynor, 25;
    placed wreath on Washington’s tomb, 26;
    speaker at dinner on S.S. _France_, 27;
    Address of, at Waldorf-Astoria dinner, 45-50:
      Mission of the French delegation, 45;
      receptions and entertainments in the United States, 45-46;
      the conquistadores of America sought gold only, 46;
      fantastic accounts of the new world, 47;
      explorers like Champlain found land like the mother country,
            47-48;
      tribute to Champlain’s foresight, 48;
      labor the true basis of American civilization, 48-49;
      presentation of the bust “La France,” 50;
    thanks to French people through, by Sen. Hill, 53;
    Address of, at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 61-65:
      La générosité américaine a déterminé le voyage de la Délégation
            française, 61-62;
      La France envoie son tribut de gratitude, 62;
      un parallèle entre les deux Républiques, 62-63;
      le commerce, 63-64;
      le Comité France-Amérique pour travailler au développement des
            bonnes relations entre les deux pays, 64;
      les volontaires de la foi, de la Liberté et de l’Amitié, 64;
      “La France,” un symbole de l’amitié franco-américaine, 65;
    responded to toast to the President of France, 67;
    Address of, at Crown Point exercises, 74-76:
      Rodin’s bust depicts France as Frenchmen conceive her, 74, 165;
      the proofs of American sympathy prompted this response, 75;
      personnel of the delegation, 75;
      friendship of France, 75;
      same sentiments animate both democracies, 75-76;
      gift of “La France,” 76;
    at Plattsburgh Barracks, 77, 79;
    M. Deschamps on address of, at Crown Point, 84;
    remarks of, on trade between United States and France, 90-91;
    on French literature, 91;
    on Pres. Taft, 91;
    reviewed experiences of French delegation in address at the Paris
            dinner, 92-93:
      Salutation of thanks to United States and Canada, 92;
      emotions of, on reaching Ticonderoga, 92-93;
      toasts proposed by, 93;
      tribute of Louis Barthou to, 93;
    remarks of, at reception to French delegation at American Embassy,
            94;
    Vidal de la Blache’s report of Address of, at Crown Point, 95-97:
      Champlain’s description of country, 95;
      the islands of the Lake, 96;
      adoption by America of the French heroes to her own honor, 96-97;
      our American work not a failure, 97;
    a foremost citizen of France, 109;
    beauty of style of, 110;
    selected the Rodin bust, 186.

  Harrison, Francis Burton, member of Committee on Foreign Affairs, 179.

  Harvard Exchange Lecturer at French universities, 111.

  Harvard University, Members of French delegation at, 27.

  Haskins, Kittredge, M. C., zealous for the project, 179.

  Hatch, Edward, Jr., maintains hatchery for gulls, 152.

  Haviland, William, Colonel, captured the French post at Isle aux
        Noix, 231.

  Hawkes, McDougall, Chairman of Franco-American Institute, 16;
    tendered luncheon to Commissions and French delegates, 25-26;
    at banquet, 32;
    presented French delegates at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 59;
    invited to the dedications, 117;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Hayes, Roscoe G., Capt. Company “I” 2d Infantry, N. G. N. Y., at
        Crown Point Forts, 121, 125.

  Hays, Lynn [Lindsay] Mortimer, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 224,
        226;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Heber, Carl Augustus, Works of, 2-3;
    won Avery prize at Architectural League in 1910, 3;
    sculptor of Champlain Statue, 6, 8, 9, 51;
    invited to the dedications, 117.

  Hedges, Job Elmer, invited to dedications, 118;
    address of, at dedication of Champlain Statue, 172;
    Champlain an epoch, 172.

  Heights of Abraham, French delegation visited the, 89.

  Henley, Robert, Capt., voted a gold medal by Congress, 233.

  Hennepin, Father Louis, French explorer, 35;
    homage to, 96.

  Hepburn, Alonzo Barton, guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31;
    Address of welcome at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 59-61:
      Obligation of this country to France, 59-60;
      welcome to visitors, 60-61;
      introduced Ambassador Jusserand, 61;
      introduced M. Gabriel Hanotaux, 61;
    introduced Count de Chambrun, 65;
    made officer of Legion of Honor, 110-11;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Heroes, French, of 17th and 18th centuries, 92;
    all adopted by America in the Tercentenary, 96;
    more popular in America than in France, 96-97;
    the founders, 97;
    their work for France not a failure, 97.

  Herrick, George Frederick, D.D., from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Herrick, Myron Timothy, M. Poincaré on, 92;
    remarks of, at dinner to French delegation on its return to Paris,
        93;
    gave reception to French delegation at the American Embassy, 93-94.

  Hervieu, Paul Ernest, guest at dinner to French delegation on its
        return to Paris, 91.

  Hiawatha, Longfellow’s, Dramatic version of, by Indians, 235.

  Hickey, Rev. Father David Joseph, Address of, at Cliff Haven, 157-58;
    Notable visitors to the school, 157;
    scope of its work, 158;
    welcome to visitors, 158.

  High Mass, first celebrated in Vermont at Fort Ste. Anne, 52.

  Highway, An international, from Florida to Quebec, 78.

  Highway for commerce and war, Lake Champlain a, 229.

  Hill, Bert Hodge, Director of American School of Classical Studies at
        Athens, Greece, a native of the Champlain valley, 214.

  HILL, HENRY WAYLAND, compiler of this Report.
    Secretary of the New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 225, 226;
    Address at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 51-55:
      Champlain’s discovery symbolized by Memorial Lighthouse, 51;
      the Tercentenary Celebration reviewed, 51-53;
      the generous and friendly gift of “La France” accepted on behalf
            of the Commissions, 53;
      tribute to the French people, 53-54;
      cordial relations between the Republics, 54;
      “La France” will help to restore interest in the Champlain
            region, 54-55;
      welcome and thanks, 55.

  HILL, HENRY WAYLAND.—Allegorical interpretation of bust “La
        France,” 18-21:
    Symbolizes development of France, 18;
    art ideals of the French, 18-19;
    the work of Auguste Rodin, 19-20;
    Benedetto Croce’s intuitional theory of æsthetics, 20;
    the bust reveals the culture and intellectual development of the
        French nation, 20;
    some French contributions to science, 20-21.

  HILL, HENRY WAYLAND.—Comment on visit of the French
        delegation and honors conferred, 109-11:
    Interest aroused, 109;
    personnel of the delegation, 109;
    addresses reported and unreported, 109-10;
    style of their littérateurs, 110;
    welcome to, and impression left by, delegation, 110;
    Knighthood in Legion of Honor conferred on W. C. Witherbee, F. S.
        Witherbee, and H. W. Hill. 110-11;
    A. B. Hepburn made an officer in the Legion, 110-11;
    C. B. Alexander presented with a Sèvres bisque group, “Télémaque
        chez Calypso,” 110-11;
    appreciation, 111.

  HILL, HENRY WAYLAND.—Construction of Memorials to Samuel
        Champlain, 1-9;
    The allegorical bust “La France” and the French delegation, 11-21;
    Hospitalities extended to French visitors, 25-97:
      New York, Washington, Philadelphia and Boston, 25-28;
      Banquet at Waldorf-Astoria, 31-55;
      entertained by Chamber of Commerce, 59-67;
      at Ticonderoga, Crown Point, and Plattsburgh, 71-86;
      Canada and Niagara Falls, 89-90;
      Impressions and comments by French visitors, 90-97;
    Comment on visit of French delegation, and honors conferred, 109-11;
    Dedicatory ceremonies, 117-73:
      Preparation, 117-22;
      Unveiling Tablet at English Fort, 125-29;
      Champlain Memorial Lighthouse at Crown Point Forts, 133-47;
      Sail to Bluff Point, 151-53;
      at Summer School, Plattsburgh Barracks, and Plattsburgh, 157-59;
      Champlain Memorial Statue at Plattsburgh, 163-73;
    Federal co-operation and assistance, 179-82;
    Review of the work of the Commission and acknowledgments of
        assistance, 185-93;
    Historical significance of the Tercentenary Celebration, 197-99;
    Representative men of the Champlain region, 203-14;
    Conclusion of the work of the Commission, 217-18;
    multifarious duties and services of its members, 217-18;
    resolution appreciating work of its Secretary, 218.

  Hill, Henry Wayland, welcomed the French delegation in New York
        harbor, 16;
    at luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    at reception at Senator Clark’s, 26;
    at the dinner on the _France_, 27;
    introduced by President Finley at the Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 50;
    at Ticonderoga, 71;
    Crown Point, 72;
    at Plattsburgh, 77;
    tribute of M. Deschamps to, 80;
    met French visitors at Niagara Falls, 90;
    made a Knight of the Legion of Honor, 111;
    with President Thomas planned programme of dedicatory ceremonies,
        119;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    and of Champlain Memorial Statue, 163;
    member Constitutional Convention of 1894, 207;
    works of, 213;
    Commission’s vote of thanks to, 218;
    moved Concurrent resolution in State Senate, 224.

  Historical significance of the Tercentenary Celebration, 197-99.

  Holden, James Austin, invited to dedications, 117;
    address accepting Tablet for N. Y. Historical Association, 126, 128;
    papers by, 213.

  Horicon Hose Co. in parade, 159.

  Horr, Roswell G., 206.

  Hose Companies escorted guests to site of Champlain Statue, 159.

  Hospitalities to French visitors, 25-28.

  Hospitality, American, 61;
    M. Poincaré on, 92;
    M. Bazin on, 101.

  Hotel Biron, home of Rodin, 15.

  Hotel Champlain, Commissioners and guests at, 153;
    beauty of site of, 153.

  Hotel Vanderbilt, The French delegation took rooms in the, 25.

  Household utensils of stone, earthenware, and bone, found in valley,
        250.

  Howard, Jacob Merritt, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Howard, Walter Eugene, Professor, member of Vermont Commission, 224;
    death of, 182;
    from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Howe, Julia Ward, resided in Rutland County, 212.

  Hudson, Henry, Champlain two months before, 51.

  Hudson, Henry Norman, born in the Champlain valley, 213.

  Hudson-Fulton Commission, Members of the Commission guests of the,
        193.

  Hughes, Charles Evans, Governor, member of New York Commission, 4, 8,
        225;
    M. Jusserand on, 38;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    at Champlain Tercentenary, 143, 158;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  Humanity of Champlain, René Bazin on the, 106.

  Hunting, George Field, D.D., from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Hurons, Battle of, with the Iroquois, 34, 230;
    admiration of, for Champlain, 35-36;
    tattooed, 81;
    Lake Champlain the battle ground of the, 226.

  Hurricane Isle Granite Co., contractors for Memorial Lighthouse, 3;
    for Plattsburgh Memorial, 8.

  Hyde Foundation for Harvard Exchange Lecturer at French
        universities, 111.


  Iberville, Pierre Le Moyne, Sieur d’, Homage to, 96.

  Illustrations, List of, ix-x.

  Implements and weapons found in the valley, 249-54, 257-58.

  Impressions of M. René Bazin, 101-6.
    For analysis _see_ author entry.

  Independence Hall, Members of French delegation visit, 27-28.

  Indian pageants at Tercentenary, 53, 235.

  Indian relics more abundant on eastern side of the Lake, 250;
    village sites, the source of, 251.

  Indian tortures, Champlain’s protest against, 34-35.

  Indian wars before Champlain came, 137.

  Inniskilling (27th) Regiment of Foot, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Inscription on Rodin’s “La France,” 17.

  Inscriptions on Memorial Lighthouse, 4-6;
    on Plattsburgh Memorial, 8;
    on Tablet at Fort Amherst, 127.

  Inspiration from Champlain, 137.

  International peace, Baron d’Estournelles de Constant spoke on, 50-51;
    Great Britain, France, Canada and the United States, speaking for,
        147.

  Invitations to dedicatory ceremonies sent out, 117-18.

  Ireland, Mgr. John, on American sentiment toward France, 92.

  Ireland conquered long ago, but Irish conspicuous to-day, 146.

  Iron, Implements of, supplied by French adventurers, 258.

  Iroquois, The, and wars of French and English, 41;
    displaced by civilization, 82;
    strife of, with Hurons, 94, 226, 230;
    wars of, 137;
    first battle of Champlain with, 144, 230;
    and English fought French and Algonquins, 145;
    high and mighty talk of chiefs of, 146;
    Champlain in pursuit of, 170;
    affiliation of, with Dutch and English, 230;
    name given to the Six Nations, 247;
    territory occupied by the, 247;
    on both sides of Lake, 247;
    feared by the Algonquins, 248;
    in Vermont, 249;
    drove out the Algonquins, 249;
    first inhabitants of western side of the valley, 249;
    superior in culture to other tribes, 250;
    pottery of, superior to that of the Algonquins, 256-57.

  Islands, Controversy over grants of, 227.

  Isle Aux Noix, 96;
    French from, defeated by Rogers near Rouse’s Point, 234;
    pageant and exercises at, 236.

  Isle La Motte, Historic interest of, 52, 96, 233-34.

  Isthmus of Panama, visited by Champlain, 36;
    canal at, proposed, 36.

  Italians, Appreciation of ideals in æsthetics by, 18-19.


  Jameson, John Alexander, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Jaray, Gabriel Louis, member of French delegation, 17.

  Jarvis, George Tibbals, member of Vermont Commission, 5;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Jefferson, Thomas, on France, 138.

  Jogues, Isaac, at Plattsburgh, 78.

  Johnson, Edwin Ferry, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Joint Resolution reported by House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 179;
    reported to Senate by Henry Cabot Lodge, 181.

  Joliet, Louis, saw the Missouri, 33, 35;
    attitude of, toward Indians, 38-39.

  Judges, Many, natives of the Champlain valley, 206-7.

  JUSSERAND, JEAN ADRIEN ANTOINE JULES, French Ambassador,
        informed Commission of French gift of “La France,” 13;
    on French commemorations in the United States, 14, 75;
    at luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    entertained French delegates, at a reception and dinner, 26-27;
    speaker at dinner on S.S. _France_, 27;
    guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31;
    introduced by Pres. Finley, 37;
    Address at banquet, 37-39:
      Recalls Tercentenary exercises, 37-38;
      desire of French to contribute to permanent Memorials, 38;
      Justice chief article of colonists’ creed, 38-39;
      exchange of friendship between two nations, 39;
    organized the French mission, 45;
    guest at Champlain Tercentenary in 1909, 52, 158, 187;
    at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 59;
    remarks at luncheon, 61;
    informed France of intended Champlain Memorials, 61-62;
    entertained at Fort Ticonderoga, 71-72;
    representative of France at exercises, 75;
    at Plattsburgh, 77;
    spoke at exercises at Plattsburgh Barracks, 79;
    personality of, 109;
    expressions of appreciation from, 111;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    represented at dedications by Count de Peretti de la Rocca, 141,
        169-170;
    appreciation of, 188.

  Justice, a chief article of the colonists’ creed, 38-39;
    Washington on, 38.


  Kasson, John Adam, M. C., from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Keese, Richard, M. C., native of the Champlain valley, 205.

  Kellogg, Brainard, Professor, author, from the Champlain valley, 211.

  Kellogg, Dr. David Sherwood, Fine pottery jar in collection of, 255;
    archæological collection of, 256n.

  Kellogg, Henry Theodore, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Kellogg, Orlando, M. C., friend of Lincoln, native of the Champlain
        valley, 205.

  Kellogg, Sylvester Alonzo, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Kellogg, William Pitt, from the Champlain valley, 203;
    Judge, 207.

  Keystone from door of Champlain’s birthplace, at banquet, 32;
    libation poured over, 33, 34.

  King George’s, or the Five years’ war, 230.

  Kingsley, Darwin Pearl, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  KNAPP, HORATIO WALLACE, Chairman of New York Commission,
          iii, 4, 218, 226;
    supervised Memorials, 6, 119;
    presided at formal exercises at Crown Point, 73;
    opening address, 73;
    introduced Lieut.-Gov. Conway, 73;
    introduced Gov. Mead, 73;
    presented French delegation, 74;
    presented Col. Cowles and staff to French visitors, 77;
    chairman of dedicatory exercises, at Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Address presenting Memorial Lighthouse to Governor of New York,
          135-36:
      Commissions discharging their final duties, 135;
      recognition of a century of peace, 135;
      thanks to Vermont Commission, 136;
      Lighthouse transferred to Executives, 136;
    introduced Count de Peretti de la Rocca, 141;
    presided at dedication of Champlain Memorial Statue at Plattsburgh,
          163;
    Address, 163-65:
      Patriotic spirit of sons of Plattsburgh, 164;
      tribute to Champlain, 164-65;
      peace assured between nations gathered at Celebration, 165;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Knives of Stone, Chipped, found, 251-52;
    of copper, 258.

  Kunz, Dr. George Frederick, invited to dedications, 117;
    loaned historic flag for draping Statue at Plattsburgh, 163.


  La Clède, Pierre, Statue to, in St. Louis, 96.

  La Fayette, Count de, at banquet, 32. _See also_ Lafayette,
        _below_.

  “La France,” _see_ “France, La.”

  La Motte-Lusière, Pierre de St. Paul, Sieur de, gave name to Isle
        La Motte, 234.

  _La Provence_, French delegation returned home on, 90.

  La Salle, René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de, and the Mississippi, 33,
        35;
    attitude of, toward Indians, 39.

  Labor, the true basis of American civilization, 48;
    apostrophe to, 48-49.

  Lafayette, Marie Jean Paul Roch Yves Gilbert Motier, Marquis de,
        Tributes of America to, 13;
    portrait of, 28;
    statue to, at Burlington, 52;
    aid from, in Revolution, 54;
    carried back inspiration from this country, 54;
    descendant of, in French delegation, 65;
    enshrined in American heart, 78;
    entertained by Mrs. Russell at Fort Niagara, 80;
    statue of, given to France by American children, 163.

  Lafayette, _see also_ La Fayette, _above_.

  Lafayette Hose Company in parade at Plattsburgh, 159.

  Lafontaine, Louis Camille, member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8,
        218, 226;
    supervised the Memorial Lighthouse, 6, 119;
    address in French on receiving gift of “La France” for the
        Commission, 76;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Lago Maggiore, Lake Champlain compared with, 153.

  Lake Champlain, described by M. Deschamps, 81-82;
    by René Bazin, 101, 104;
    separates and unites New York and Vermont, 140;
    Sail down, to Bluff Point, 151-53;
    works on the history of, 211;
    importance of discovery of, 223, 224, 225;
    battle ground of Indian nations, 226-27;
    known as “Caniaderiguarunte,” the “gate of the country,” 227;
    and “Mer des Iroquois,” 227;
    many expeditions and engagements on, 227;
    noted officers visited its forts, 227;
    disputes over grants of islands and shore lands of, 227-28;
    from S. S. Cutting’s poem on, 228;
    historic importance of, 229;
    a thoroughfare in hostile times and for commerce, 229;
    reached and named by Champlain, 230;
    France claimed by discovery, 230;
    forts on, 231;
    Arnold’s naval battle on, 232;
    Macdonough’s victory on, 233;
    the door of the northern country, 229, 233;
    expedition from Isle La Motte, 233-34;
    Indian pageants on, 235;
    celebration of discovery of, of international importance, 236;
    called Sea of the Iroquois, 81, 249.

  “Lake Champlain,” poem by S. S. Cutting, Extracts from, 152, 228.

  Lake Champlain Association, joined in banquet to French delegation,
        31, 33;
    M. Hanotaux presents bust “La France” to, and Commissions, 50;
    Frank S. Witherbee, President of, 110;
    Board of Governors of, sent invitations to dedicatory exercises to
        members, 118;
    took charge of Waldorf-Astoria dinner, 118;
    Commission grateful to, 192.

  Lake Champlain district, Struggle for the, 146.

  Lake Champlain Tercentenary Celebration, Historical significance of
        the [by HENRY W. HILL], 197-99:
      Possible result of, 197;
      critical history of the valley yet to be written, 197;
      authorities on successive periods of, 197-98;
      documentary and other sources in archives and libraries, 198;
      settlement and development of valley since War of 1812, 198-99;
      spirit of settlers, 199;
    Significance of the anniversary, 225.

  Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission of New York, Final Report of,
        to Legislature, iii, 1;
    previous Reports, 1;
    Bills concerning, 1;
    members of, iii, 4, 8;
    welcomes French delegation, 16;
    Report of, presented to French delegates, 17;
    mission of French delegation to present bust to, 17;
    tendered luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    M. Jusserand on hospitality of, 38;
    invitations sent by, to the dedicatory ceremonies of the Crown
        Point and Plattsburgh Memorials, 117-18;
    chartered the _Ticonderoga_, 119-20;
    at dedication of the Tablet, 126;
    members of, at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Chairman of, presented Memorial to Governor of New York, 135-36;
    thanks Vermont Commission and the Executives of both States, 136;
    Mayor Roberts on the Report of the, 143.

  Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission of New York, Brief review of
          work of the, and acknowledgments of assistance rendered [by
          HENRY W. HILL], 185-93:
      The Preliminary Commission, 185;
      co-operation of Vermont Commission in Crown Point Memorial,
          185-86;
      Memorial Statue at Plattsburgh, 186;
      the Celebration, Canadian troops, and foreign representatives,
          187-88;
      addresses of M. Jusserand and James Bryce, 188;
      of MM. Lemieux and Gouin, 189;
      of Baron Uriu, 189;
      acknowledges its obligations to distinguished visitors and
          Foreign Governments, 189;
      “La France” and the French delegation, 190;
      American officials and military organizations, 191-92;
      acknowledgments for other assistance, and for entertainments,
          192-93;
    Conclusion of the work of the, 217-18;
    Activities of the Commissioners, 217-18;
    Resolution of thanks to Secretary Hill, 218;
    co-operation of State Governors and Legislatures and of the
          National Government, 218;
    turned balance back into State Treasury, 218;
    Concurrent resolution authorizing appointment of the, 224;
    meetings, report, and recommendations of, to Legislature, 225;
    appropriation for, 226;
    Financial statement, 263.

  Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission of Vermont, Members of, 5,
        224;
    joined in erecting the Memorials, 74;
    invitations to dedicatory exercises sent to, 118;
    at dedication of Tablet, 126;
    members of, at dedication of Lighthouse, 133;
    formally transfers Lighthouse to Governor of Vermont, 136;
    efforts of, appreciated by Vermont, 139;
    joined with New York Commission in erection of Memorial Lighthouse,
        185-86;
    Joint resolution authorizing appointment of, 223-24;
    joint meetings of, with New York Commission, 225.

  Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commissions, French people raising funds
        to present a bust to, 13;
    mission of French delegation sent to, 17;
    luncheon tendered to, at Metropolitan Club, 25;
    received by Senator W. A. Clark, 26;
    guests at dinner on the _France_, 27;
    and at reception at C. B. Alexander’s, 27;
    State banquet to French delegation at the Waldorf-Astoria, 31-55;
    M. Hanotaux presented bust to, 50;
    gift received on behalf of, by Henry W. Hill, 51, 53, 55;
    welcome French delegation, 55;
    entertained by Commissioner Pell at Fort Ticonderoga, 71-72;
    at Port Henry, 72;
    presentation of “La France” by M. Hanotaux at Crown Point Memorial,
        74-76;
    with guests at Plattsburgh, 77-80;
    issued formal invitations to the dedicatory ceremonies of the
        Memorials, 117-18;
    assisted by the Lake Champlain Association, 118;
    planned to turn over the Memorials to proper authorities, 118;
    aided by people of Plattsburgh, 119;
    sail down the Lake to Bluff Point, 119-20, 147, 151-53;
    Society of Colonial Wars, guests of, 125-26;
    members of, at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    duties of, ended, 135, 138;
    at Hotel Champlain, 153;
    visit Cliff Haven, 157;
    witness review at Plattsburgh Barracks, 158;
    entertained by Smith M. Weed at Plattsburgh, 158;
    at luncheon at Fouquet House by Chamber of Commerce, 159;
    escorted to site of Champlain Memorial Statue, 159;
    at dedicatory ceremonies, 163;
    the joint memorial erected by, at Crown Point Forts, 185-86;
    successful conclusion of the Celebration by the, 187-89;
    Tour of the Lake by the, 225.

  Lake House, Crown Point Village, Company “I,” 2d N. G., N. Y., in
        camp at, 121.

  Lake Superior, Copper from, 257.

  Lalande, Joseph Jérôme Lefrançois de, Contributions of, to astronomy,
        21.

  Lalemant, Gabriel, French explorer, 35.

  Lamoille River, The, 248.

  Lamy, Étienne Marie Victor, member of French delegation, 16;
    at banquet, 44;
    impressed with Memorial Lighthouse, 72;
    at Plattsburgh Barracks, 77;
    spoke in French, 79.

  “Land of the White Helmet,” by E. A. Forbes, 39.

  Landon, Warren Hall, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Lands, Controversy over grants of shore, 227-28.

  Lanel, Étienne Marie Louis, French Consul-General, welcomed French
        delegation, 16;
    at banquet, 32.

  Langelier, Francis Charles Stanislas, Lt.-Gov., of Canada,
        entertained the French delegation in Canada, 89.

  Laplace, Pierre Simonde de, Contributions of, to science, 21.

  Larabee, Benjamin, President of Middlebury College, 208.

  Larrabee’s Point, side door to New England, 233.

  Latin America, Toast to people of, at Paris dinner, 93.

  Laurens, Jean Paul, “Surrender of Yorktown,” painting by, in Court
        House of Baltimore, 75.

  Laval-Montmorency, François Xavier de, Bishop, visits Fort St. Anne,
        234.

  Lavelle, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Michael Joseph, pronounced benediction at
        dedication of Champlain Statue, 172-73.

  Lawyers, natives of the Champlain valley. 207.

  Lebon, Félix Frédéric Georges, Général, member of the French
        delegation, 16, 44;
    saw strategic importance of Ticonderoga, 71-72;
    at review at Plattsburgh Barracks, 77;
    spoke in French, 79;
    M. Deschamps on honor shown to, 85.

  Legends, Fantastic, of the New World, believed, 47.

  Legion of Honor, Insignia of, conferred on Senator Raoul Dandurand,
        93;
    Knighthood in the, conferred on W. C. Witherbee and Frank S.
        Witherbee, 110;
    A. Barton Hepburn made an Officer in the, 110-11;
    Knighthood in the, conferred on John H. Finley and Henry W. Hill,
        111.

  Le Jeune, Père Paul, on the Indians’ admiration for Champlain,
        35-36.

  Lemieux, Rodolphe, Address of, at Plattsburgh, 38;
    represented Canada at Tercentenary, 52, 187;
    the address of, 189.

  L’Enfant, Pierre Charles, Major, planned city of Washington, 46.

  Lesseps, Ferdinand, Vicomte de, 13;
    and the Panama Canal, 36.

  Lessons from Champlain’s life, 138.

  Lester, James Westcott, Colonel, and staff of Second Regiment of
        National Guard, N. Y., Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Leverrier, Urbain Jean Joseph, Contributions of, to astronomy, 21.

  Liberties, popular, Stability of nations founded upon, 18.

  “Liberty enlightening the World,” Bartholdi’s, presented by the
        French people, 54, 60.

  Light Brigade, The, at Balaklava, and the Black Watch, “Old
        Forty-Twa,” at Fort Ticonderoga, 129.

  Light Infantry Fort, at Crown Point, 239.

  Lighthouse, The, a symbol of national life, 141.

  Lighthouse, Champlain Memorial, at Crown Point Forts, 1-6:
      Cost of, 3;
      artistic features of, 3-4;
      inscriptions and arms on, 4-6;
    M. Hanotaux on French contribution to, 15;
    fitting memorial to Champlain, 35;
    symbolizes Champlain’s discovery, 51;
    on highway of water travel, 54;
    pleases French visitors, 72, 186;
    permanent location chosen for bust “La France” on, 73, 190;
    formal exercises at, [for analysis see Crown Point Forts], 73-76;
    Description of, by Deschamps, 83-84;
    René Bazin on the unveiling of “La France” at, 104-5;
    a testimonial in bronze of the good will of France on, 110;
    military features at dedication of, 120, 121;
    Dedicatory ceremonies, 133-47:
      Prominent guests, 133;
      invocation by Rev. Lewis Francis, 134;
      unveiling of, by Miss Louise G. Witherbee, 134;
      address of Chairman Knapp presenting Memorial to Governor of New
          York, 135-36;
      Pres. John M. Thomas presented Memorial to representative of
          Governor of Vermont, 136;
      address of Gov. Dix transferring Memorial to United States,
          136-37;
      address of Adjt.-Gen. Tillotson transferring Memorial to United
          States, 138-40;
      address of William Cary Sanger receiving Memorial on part of
          United States, 140-41;
      address of Count de Peretti de la Rocca representing France,
          141-42;
      address of Robert Roberts, 142-47;
      benediction by Rev. J. W. Dwyer, 147;
    Port Henry overlooks, 151;
    joint work of New York and Vermont Commissions, 185-86;
    French delegation approved and placed “La France” as seal on, 186,
          190.

  Literary exercises, Contributors to high quality of, 191.

  Littebrant, William Thomas, Captain, and staff of Fifteenth U. S.
        Cavalry, Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Lloyd, James Horace, Brig.-Gen., and staff of Third Brigade of
        National Guard, N. Y., Obligations of Commission to, 191-92.

  Locarno and Bluff Point, 153.

  Lodge, Henry Cabot, U. S. Senator, reported Joint Resolution to
        Senate, 181.

  Long House, The, of the Iroquois, 41;
    alliance of, with the English forces, 41;
    greatest war machine of the time, 137.

  Longfellow’s Hiawatha, Dramatic version of, presented by Indians, 235.

  Longworth, Charles F., expert in food products, 208.

  Louis XV sent Montcalm to Ticonderoga, 102;
    officials of, 227.

  Louis XVI, Officials of, 227.

  Louis the Just, Champlain on France under, 14.

  Louisiana, Cession of, 35;
    anniversary of Treaty of cession of, 36;
    once the territory of France, 60.

  Louvre, Works of modern sculptors in the, 19.

  Lovell’s, Col., New Hampshire Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Lowell, Abbott Lawrence, President of Harvard University, entertained
        French delegates at luncheon, 27.

  Lyman’s, Col. Phineas, Connecticut Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Lynde, John, Judge, 207.

  Lyon, J. B., Company, Excellence of typographical work of, 193.


  Mabie, Hamilton Wright, on the story of Lake Champlain, 72, 166;
    on the beauties of the Champlain valley during the Tercentenary
        Celebration, 199.

  McCarren, Patrick Henry, Senator, Death of, 182.

  McCuen, Robert William, moved the appointment of the Vermont
        Commission, 181;
    member of Commission, 224.

  McCullough, John Griffith, guest at banquet, 32.

  Macdonough, Thomas, Commodore of American fleet, 40, 52;
    to have monument on Lake Champlain, 169;
    importance of victory of, 228;
    defeated British squadron, 233;
    Congress voted a gold medal to, 233.

  MacKaye, Percy, “Ballad of Ticonderoga,” 72, 81.

  McLaughlin, Chester Bentine, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  McMahon, Michael Deavitt, member of Vermont Commission, 224.

  Macomb, Alexander, Brig.-Gen. commanding Americans at Plattsburgh,
        233.

  Maine, England after northeast corner of, 233.

  Maisonneuve, Paul de Chomedey, Sieur de, Statue to, in Montreal, 96;
    founder of Montreal, 96.

  Malby, George Ronald, M. C., Efforts of, for Federal co-operation,
        179, 182;
    death of, 182;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  _Manley_, torpedo boat, in the flotilla, 191.

  Maps of the region, 198.

  Marin, ——, French officer, saved Israel Putnam from being burned by
        Indians, 235.

  Marquette, James, saw the Missouri, 33, 35;
    statue of, in the Capitol at Washington, 96.

  Marseillaise, The, played, 72, 77;
    M. Deschamps on, 80, 84, 86.

  Marsh, George Perkins, from the Champlain valley, 204;
    the works of, 210.

  Marsh, James, President of the University of Vermont, 208;
    writings of, 210.

  Martin, George, Judge, native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Massachusetts granite for Plattsburgh Memorial, 7, 8.

  Massachusetts Historical Society, Collections, 198.

  Masson, Frédéric, presided at meeting of the Five Academies, 94.

  _Matin, Le_, aided the Franco-American Committee, 16.

  Maugras, Charles Gaston, of the French Embassy, invited to the
        dedications, 117;
    at dedication of Tablet, 125.

  Maurepas, Jean Frédéric Phélippeaux, Fort Frédéric named after, 52,
        227, 239.

  Mead, Rev. Charles Marsh, author, from the Champlain valley, 211.

  Mead, John Abner, Governor, member of Vermont Commission, 5;
    guest at the Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 32;
    declined to speak, 43;
    entertained at Fort Ticonderoga, 71-72;
    remarks of, at Crown Point exercises, 74;
    represented by Adjt.-Gen. Tillotson at dedication of Memorial
        Lighthouse, 120, 125, 138;
    and of Champlain Statue, 166;
    regret at absence of, 139;
    Gen. Tillotson on cause of illness of, 167;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  Memorial Lighthouse, _see_ Lighthouse.

  Memorials to Samuel Champlain, Construction of [by HENRY W.
        HILL], 1-9:
    Bill authorizing, passed, 1;
    opportunity at Crown Point Forts for a Memorial Lighthouse, 2;
    contracts let for, 3;
    cost, 3;
    artistic features of, 3-4;
    inscriptions on, 4-5;
    arms on, 5;
    Tablet on, 6;
    the Rodin bust, 6;
    the Plattsburgh Memorial, 6-9:
      Described by the architects, 7;
      inscriptions on, 8;
      the Statue, 8;
      completion and cost, 9.
    _See also_ Champlain Memorial.

  Mens agitat molem, 63.

  Menu cards at State banquet, 31.

  “Mer des Iroquois,” 227.

  Merritt, Edwin Atkins, Jr., Chairman Committee on Appropriations, 182.

  Messier, Charles, Contributions of, to science, 21.

  Metropolitan Club in New York, Luncheon at, 25.

  Michael Angelo, Rodin as devoted to mastery of nature as, 19.

  Middlebury College Library, 198.

  Military Committee, Report of, by Howland Pell, 120-22:
    Staff of Gov. Dix, 120;
    representatives of Gov. Mead, 120;
    military companies, 121;
    participation of companies in Crown Point exercises, 121;
    review of Fifth Infantry at Plattsburgh Barracks, 122;
    list of officers and men at ceremony, 122.

  Military features of the ceremonies, _see_ Military Committee, Report
        of.

  Military records of the United States, France, Great Britain and
        Canada, 198.

  Millard, Stephen Columbus, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 203.

  Missionaries, Early French, 33, 35, 102;
    treatment of natives by, 38-39;
    sowed the seeds of civilization, 60;
    _les volontaires de la foi et de l’espérance_, 64.

  Missisquoi Bay, Major Robert Rogers at, 234.

  Missisquoi River, The, 248.

  Mississippi River, Pres. Finley on the, 33.

  Mississippi valley, Pres. Finley on the, 33.

  Missouri River, Pres. Finley on the, 33-34.

  Mitchell, Dr. and Mrs. Silas Weir, at luncheon to the French
        delegation, 28.

  Moffit, John Henry, M. C., banker, born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Moffitt, Stephen, General, born in the Champlain valley, 208.

  Mohawks attack Fort Ste. Anne, 234.

  Mohegans, Encampments of, displaced by pleasant homes, 82.

  Molière, _Les Fourberies de Scapin_ of, played by students of College
        of City of New York, 25.

  Mona Lisa, “La France” fit to replace the, 18.

  Money loaned us by France, 59.

  Monk, Frederick de Bartzch, helped entertain French visitors in
        Canada, 89.

  Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de, once mayor of Bordeaux, 43.

  Montcalm de Saint-Véran, Louis Joseph, Marquis de, defeated
        Abercromby, 40, 231;
    achieved fame at Ticonderoga, 55;
    victory of, in 1758, 71, 93;
    at Plattsburgh, 78;
    French delegation decorated tomb of, 89;
    Vidal de la Blache on memories of, 94, 95;
    homage to, in America, 96;
    defended Fort Carillon against the English, 102;
    Germain redoubt constructed by, 103;
    inspiring deeds of, 128;
    M. Jusserand’s tribute to, 188;
    garrisoned Fort Carillon, 231.

  Montgomery, Richard, Brig.-Gen., joined Gen. Schuyler on Isle La
        Motte, 234.

  Montgomery’s Highlanders, 77th Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Montpetit, Édouard, Professor, of Laval University, helped to
        entertain the French visitors in Canada, 89.

  Montreal, Site of, fixed by Champlain, 48;
    reception and banquet to French delegation at, 89;
    founded by Maisonneuve, 96;
    M. Bazin on the journey to, 106.

  Montreal Chamber of Commerce, welcomes French visitors, 89.

  Montreal Library, 198.

  Mooers, Benjamin, Maj.-Gen., commanded militia at Battle of
        Plattsburgh, 159.

  Moore, Sir Henry, in land controversy, 227.

  Moore, John White, Rear-Admiral, a native of the Champlain valley,
        208.

  Moore, Pliny, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Morning, Early, at Lake Champlain, 101.

  Mortars, Stone, very uncommon in region, 253.

  Morton, Levi Parsons, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Morvan, The mountains of, recalled, 95.

  Mott, Edward, Captain, Report of, 243-44:
    Order to Ethan Allen, 243;
    informed Congress of capture of Ticonderoga, 243;
    Major in Col. Gay’s regiment, 244.

  Mott, Samuel, Chief Engineer of the northern army, 243-44.

  Mount Defiance, overtowering Ticonderoga, 72;
    Burgoyne erected a battery on, 232.

  Mount Independence, owned by S. H. P. Pell, 71;
    commanding position of, 72.

  Mount Mansfield rises back of Burlington, 151.

  Mount of France, The, at Ticonderoga, 103.

  Mount Vernon, French delegation visits, 26.

  Musée du Luxembourg, Works of modern sculptors in, 19.

  Museum, The house of Fort Carillon a, 104.

  Museum of French Art, Opening of a, 26.

  Myers, John Rossiter, Tribute of M. Deschamps to, 80;
    aided the Commission, 193.


  Naples and Burlington compared, 151.

  Nathan Beman Chapter, D. A. R., took part in reception of French
        delegation, 79.

  Nation, A, may lose in war, but a great race can hardly be rubbed
        out, 146.

  National Assembly of France aroused, 54;
    response of, to message of President of United States in 1848, 54.

  National Government, The, protects all the people, 140.

  National Guard of New York, Third Brigade of, Obligations of
        Commission to officers and members of, 191-92.

  National Press Club, Washington, D. C., gave reception to French
        delegation, 27.

  Nations cannot neglect courtesies, 14.

  Navy, Natives of the Champlain valley in the, 207, 209.

  Nebulae, The, 21.

  Nelson, Charles Alexander, Indexes by, 193.

  Nelson, Samuel, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 206.

  New England slowly becoming New France, 146.

  New France, Champlain founder of, 168.

  New York City, Hospitalities extended to French visitors in, 25-26,
        27;
    M. Hanotaux on, 45, 46, 49;
    M. Bazin on, 101.

  New York Historical Society, Collections, 198.

  New York State, Arms of, on base of Memorial Lighthouse, 5;
    once owned Ticonderoga, 95;
    Senators and Representatives from, invited, 117;
    Governor and other officials of, invited to dedications, 117;
    co-operation of Governors and Legislatures of, 218;
    share of, in general expenses and cost of Memorials, 218;
    controversies of, with Vermont, 232.

  New York State Historical Association, Tablet at Fort Amherst
        placed in charge of, 126;
    address of acceptance by Treasurer of, 128;
    address of acceptance by Secretary of, 129;
    Collections of the, 198;
    papers in publications of, 214.

  New York State Museum, Bulletins of, 258.

  Niagara Falls, French visitors entertained at, 90.

  Nichols, George Frederick, Colonel, native of the Champlain valley,
        207.

  Ninth Separate Company of Whitehall, at Crown Point Forts, 121, 125.

  Noonan, Thomas Hazard, Judge, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Notes on the archæology of the Champlain valley (G. H.
        PERKINS), 247-58.

  Nouvelle-Angleterre, la, Une des proclamations de, 63.


  O’Brien, John Francis, Secretary of State, born in the Champlain
        valley, 206.

  Officers, Noted, visited the forts, 227.

  Ohio, once French territory, 60.

  Ohio River, The, called La Belle Rivière, 34.

  Olcott, Jacob Van Vechten, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  “Old Forty-Twa” Royal Highlanders, 129.

  Oliver, Robert Shaw, Brig.-Gen., accompanied the French delegates to
        Mount Vernon, 26.

  Orion, The great nebula of, 21.

  O’Ryan, John F., Maj.-Gen., invited to dedications, 117;
    guest of the Commission at Crown Point, 120;
    at dedication of the Tablet, 125.

  Ottawa Library, 198.

  Otter Creek, American squadron fitted out at mouth of, 234;
    a moulded copper celt found at, 258.

  Oubanghi, Future city on the, 14.


  Page, Carroll Smalley, aided in securing Federal co-operation, 181.

  Palmer, Frank, Colonel, native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Palmer, George William, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Palmer, Peter Sailly, “History of Lake Champlain,” and “History of
        the Battle of Valcour on Lake Champlain,” 197.

  Paltsits, Victor Hugo, Papers by, 214;
    light on early history of the region in, 240.

  Pan-American Building, Ball at the, to French delegation, 27.

  Panama Canal, Frenchmen and the, 36;
    conceived by Champlain, 36, 137;
    M. Hanotaux on the, 49.

  Parade, Civic and military, at Plattsburgh, 159.

  Paris, Dinner to French delegation on return to, 91-93;
    Americans return to, Frenchmen to America, 142.

  Parisian press, The, aided the Franco-American Committee, 16.

  Parker, John Mason, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 204, 207.

  Parkman, Francis, on the struggles about Crown Point, 72;
    on French pioneers, 170;
    historical works of, 197.

  “Pastoral,” Heber’s statue of the, 3.

  Patridge, John Alden, Captain, from the Champlain valley, 209.

  Patriotism, Intense, in France, 18;
    of sons of Plattsburgh, 164.

  Pau, The plain of, suggested by view at Carillon, 104.

  Paulding, William, Colonel, and staff, of the Twenty-fourth U. S.
        Infantry, Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  “Pavilion, The,” summer home of S. H. P. Pell. 71.

  “Paysages d’Amérique” (RENÉ BAZIN), 101-6.

  Peace, between English speaking peoples, One hundredth anniversary
        of, 78;
    light of, replaces fitful fire of early war, 135;
    a century of, 135, 164;
    forces working for, 147;
    an occasion to exchange words for international, 147;
    assured, 165.

  Peace projects, Great, planned between the United States and British
        Empire, 78.

  PELL, HOWLAND, Member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8,
        218, 226;
    supervised erection of the Memorial Lighthouse, 6, 119;
    ancient pieces of armor of, used as models, 8;
    looked after details at banquet at Waldorf, 31;
    entertained Joint Commissions in Block House, 71, 193;
    at dock to bid farewell to French delegation, 90;
    Report of the Military Committee, 120-22;
    Report of Tablet Committee on exercises at the unveiling, 125-27;
    At dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Services rendered by, 218.

  Pell, Stephen Hyatt Pelham, at banquet at the Waldorf-Astoria, 32;
    welcomes and entertains the French delegation at Ticonderoga, 71,
        102, 192;
    M. Bazin on the hospitality of, 102-3;
    bought land to protect historical ground, 71, 103;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    at unveiling of Tablet, 126;
    entertained President Taft, 192.

  Pell, William Ferris, Descendants of, own Ticonderoga, 95.

  Pelletier, Sir Adolphe, at the Celebration, 187.

  People assembled at Crown Point Forts, René Bazin on the, 104-5.

  People of the Champlain valley. Enthusiastic support shown to the
        Commission by the, 193.

  Peretti de la Rocca, Emmanuel, Count de, met the French delegates in
        Washington, 26;
    invited to the dedications, 117;
    at dedication of the Tablet, 125;
    represented the French Ambassador at the dedication of the Memorial
        Lighthouse, 133;
    Address of, 141-42:
      Many commemorations bind together the two Republics, 142;
      Frenchmen now discover America and love it, 142;
    visited Cliff Haven, 157;
    salute in honor of, at Plattsburgh Barracks, 158;
    Address at dedication of Champlain Statue, 170-71:
      Monument to remind tourists of their first great predecessor, 170;
      efforts of French explorers not in vain, 170;
      thanks in French for cordial reception, 171.

  Peretti de la Rocca, Countess de [_née_ Lepidi de Gaffory], at the
        dedicatory exercises, 133.

  PERKINS, GEORGE HENRY.—Notes on the archæology of the
        Champlain valley, 247-58;
    Occupants of the territory, 247-48;
    claims of the Caughnawagas, 248;
    Iroquois on both sides of the Lake, 249;
    implements and weapons found, 249-52;
    gouges, 252;
    hammers, 252-53;
    pestles and mortars, 253;
    axes or hatchets, 254;
    ceremonial and other stones, 254;
    pipes, 255;
    pottery, 255-56;
    bone objects, and shell beads, 257;
    copper from Lake Superior, 257;
    Dr. Beauchamp’s writings on, 258.

  Perkins, George Henry, Professor, Notes on the archæology of the
        valley by, a valuable contribution to this Report, 193;
    works of, 211.

  Perkins, James Breck, writer on French history, 179.

  Perry, Aaron F., M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 204.

  Personnel and mission of the French delegation, 13, 16-17.

  Peru, The conquistadores sought gold only in, 46.

  Pestles of stone, some carved, found, 253.

  Phelps, Dr. Abel Mix, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Phelps, Charles Henry, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Phelps, Edward John, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Phelps, Samuel Shethar, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Philadelphia, Hospitalities extended to members of French delegation
        in, 27-28;
    M. Hanotaux on, 46.

  Philippine Islands, Justice in the, 38.

  Piaz, J. Dal, _see_ Dal Piaz, J.

  Pigeon, Henri, M. Deschamps on, 85.

  Pilgrims, Champlain eleven years before the, 51.

  Pipes, Stone and earthenware, of the Champlain valley, 255.

  Pitt, William, Correspondence of Colonial Governors and officers
        with, 198, 239-40.

  Pizarro, Francisco, No gathering of many peoples to honor, 164.

  Platt, Thomas Collier, U. S. Senator, aided in securing Federal
        co-operation, 181.

  Platt, Zephaniah, member of first Provincial Congress, 206.

  Plattsburgh, Champlain Memorial at, 1, 6-9, 51;
    purchased site for Memorial, 6, 119;
    the Tercentenary Celebration at, 38;
    Commissioners and visitors welcomed at, 77-80;
    Vidal de la Blache recalled associations of 1814 at, 96;
    Mayor and people of, assisted the Commissioners, 119;
    Committee of Chamber of Commerce of, meets Commissioners and guests
        at Bluff Point, 157;
    tour of city and reception at home of Smith M. Weed, 158-59;
    luncheon at Fouquet House, 159;
    parade to site of Memorial Statue, 159;
    dedicatory ceremonies, 163-73;
    patriotic spirit of sons of, 163;
    liberal benefactors of, 168;
    Memorial Statue accepted on behalf of, 168;
    Library at, 198;
    land engagements about, 233;
    military pageant and formal exercises at, planned, 235-36.

  Plattsburgh Barracks, Pageant at, 52;
    exercises at, welcoming French delegation, 77-80:
      Address of V. F. Boire, 78-79;
      addresses by French visitors, 79;
      remarks of Mrs. G. F. Tuttle, 79-80;
      regimental dress parade, 80;
    M. Deschamps’ description of reception at, 85-86;
    the salute by Col. Cowles, 86;
    reviews of Fifth Infantry U. S. A. at, 122, 158.

  Plattsburgh, Battle of, Graves of British officers who fell in,
        visited, 158;
    Maj.-Gen. Mooers commander of militia at, 159.

  Plattsburgh Bay, Naval engagement in, 40, 52, 164, 233;
    Davidson’s painting of “The Battle of Lake Champlain,” 159.

  Plattsburgh Memorial, _see_ Champlain Memorial Statue.

  _Plattsburgh_, steam cutter in the flotilla, 191.

  Plumley, Frank, Obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  Poëte, Marcel, on the intellectual expansion of France in the United
        States, 25.

  Poincaré, Raymond, President of Council of Ministers, sends personal
        representative, 17, 62, 66;
    elected President of France, 67;
    subscribed to fund for bust, 75, 186;
    presided at dinner to French delegation on its return to Paris, 91;
    on Myron T. Herrick, 92;
    closing address at dinner, 93;
    as President of France made Henry W. Hill a Knight of the Legion
        of Honor, 111.

  Point au Fer, fortified by Gen. Sullivan, 235.

  _Pointe de la Couronne_, 240.

  Port Henry, Commissioners and guests at, 72, 151;
    M. Deschamps on reception at, 80-81;
    his word-picture of, 82;
    guests from, on the _Ticonderoga_, 119, 120;
    Library at, 198.

  Port Henry Band, at Crown Point, 121, 125;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 134.

  Port Kent, gateway to the Adirondacks, 152.

  Portales, Jacques de. Count, guest at banquet, 32.

  Porter, Horace, General, guest at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31.

  Porter, Peter Augustus, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Portico, or veranda, a distinctive feature of colonial architecture,
        95.

  Potter, Joseph, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Pottery, Great variety of, found, 255-56;
    Algonkian and Iroquoian, 256-57.

  Powers, Horace Henry, M. C. and Chief Judge Supreme Court of Vermont,
        205.

  Preliminary Champlain Commission, Work of the, 185;
    acknowledgment for entertainment and transportation of the, 192;
    entertained by Ethan Allen Club, 192.

  Prentice, Samuel, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Preparation for dedicatory ceremonies, including military features,
        117-22:
    Formal invitations sent out, 117-18;
    arrangements planned by, and assistance given to the Commissioners,
        118-19;
    attendance at exercises, 119-20;
    report of Military Committee, 120-22.

  President of the French Republic, Toasts to, at Waldorf-Astoria
        banquet, 32, 37;
    at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 67;
    at dinner in Paris on return of French delegation, 93.

  President of the United States, Toasts to, 32, 34;
    lent his presence to Tercentenary ceremonies, 37;
    message of, on establishment of French Republic, 54;
    Toast to, at Paris dinner, 93;
    unable to attend dedicatory exercises, 118.

  Press, the, of this country and of Canada, Thanks of Commissioners
        to, 193.

  Prevost, Sir George, commander of British forces about Plattsburgh,
        233.

  “Prideaux’s” (55th) Regiment of Foot, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Proctor, Fletcher Dutton, Governor, approved Resolution appointing
        Vermont Commission, 181, 224;
    gave strong support, 182;
    death of, 182.

  Proctor, Redfield, Senator, favored Tercentenary, 181, 182;
    death of, 181.

  Prouty, George Herbert, Governor, member of Vermont Commission, 5,
        226;
    M. Jusserand on, 38;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    at Champlain Tercentenary, 143, 138;
    obligations of the Commissions to, 191.

  Provincial regiments commanded by Gen. Amherst, List of, on Tablet,
        127.

  Pruyn, John I., Colonel, and staff Tenth Infantry N. G. N. Y.,
        Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Puga-Borne, Federico, spoke at dinner in Paris to French delegation,
        93.

  Putnam, Israel, Major, Attempt of Indians to burn, near Whitehall,
        235.

  Pyrke, Berne Ashley, Judge, of Port Henry, pledged care of the
        Tablet, 126.


  Quebec celebrated memory of Champlain, 14;
    site of, fixed by Champlain, 48, 89, 189;
    entertained French visitors, 89;
    M. Bazin on the journey to, 106;
    taken by English, 146;
    foundations of New France laid by Champlain at, 230.

  Quebec Library, 198.

  Quebec, Province of, French speaking people in, 89;
    still French, 146.

  Quebec-Miami International Highway, 78.


  Raines, John, Senator, Death of, 182.

  Rastus, Uncle, not the respondent, 166-67.

  Ray, Ossian, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Raymond, Henry Jarvis, founder of the New York _Times_, graduated at
        the University of Vermont, 204.

  Read, Almon Heath, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Receptions tendered to the French delegation, 16, 25, 26, 27, 28, 71,
        77, 89, 90.

  Reford, Robert Wilson, helped to entertain the French visitors in
        Canada, 89.

  Regiments of France represented at the battle of Fort Carillon,
        Standards of the, displayed, 103-4.

  Reid, William Max, Light thrown on early history of the region in
        papers of, 240.

  Renaissance of constitutional government in France, 18.

  Report of the Tablet Committee by Chairman Howland Pell, 125-27.

  Representative men of the Champlain Valley [by HENRY W.
        HILL], 203-14:
    Statesmen, 203;
    members of Congress, 203-6;
    early settlers, 206;
    judges, 206-7;
    lawyers, 207;
    in army and navy, 207-8, 209;
    educators, 208-9;
    authors, 209-14.

  Representatives, Official, of France, Great Britain, and Canada, at
        the Celebration, 187-89;
    added dignity and stateliness to the functions, 188;
    obligations of Commission to, and their Governments acknowledged,
        189;
    U. S. Government should invite, 236.

  Republican movement in America, Effects of, felt in Europe, 54.

  Républiques, Un parallèle entre les deux, 62-63;
    les deux filles aînées de la liberté, 63.

  Rescue Hose Company in parade at Plattsburgh, 159.

  Revol, Auguste François, President of Montreal Chamber of Commerce,
        helped to entertain French visitors, 89.

  Revolutionists, The buff and blue covered, 128.

  _Revue des Deux Mondes_, “Paysages d’Amérique” by René Bazin in, 101.

  Reynolds, George Greenwood, at unveiling of Tablet at English Fort,
        126.

  Rhode Island Historical Society, 198.

  Richards, Frederick Bates, Secretary of New York State Historical
        Association, 117;
    accepted charge of Tablet at Fort Amherst for the Association, 126;
    address of, 129;
    papers by, 213.

  Richelieu River, Champlain’s expedition into the, 230.

  Riley, John Benedict, Judge, member of New York Commission, iii, 4,
        8, 218, 226;
    supervised the Plattsburgh Memorial, 6, 119;
    escorted Commissioners and guests to Plattsburgh, 77;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    trustee of Cliff Haven Summer School, 158;
    presided at Chamber of Commerce luncheon, 159;
    native of the Champlain valley, 207;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Roberts, Daniel, lawyer, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Roberts, James Arthur, President of New York State Historical
        Association, 117;
    absent from unveiling of Tablet, 129.

  ROBERTS, ROBERT, Mayor of Burlington, invited to the
        dedications, 118;
    Address at dedication of the Memorial Lighthouse, 142-47:
      History of the Lake unfolded at the Champlain Tercentenary, 143;
      apostrophe to La Belle France, embodied in image, 143;
      Champlain’s account of his first battle with the Iroquois, 144;
      impression on the Iroquois of the white men, 144;
      stillness of the wilderness, 144;
      struggles between French and English, 145;
      capture of Ticonderoga by Ethan Allen, 145-46;
      a nation may be defeated but a race is not rubbed out, 146;
      forces at work for peace, 147;
    Digest of the Vermont Reports by, 213.

  Roberval, Jean François de la Roque, Sieur de, French Viceroy of
        Canada, 102.

  Rochambeau, Jean Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, Count de, General,
        Portrait of, in Independence Hall, 28;
    brought aid to the Colonies, 54;
    enshrined in American memory, 78.

  Rochambeau, Philippe Donatien Paul, Count de, member of the French
        delegation, 17, 62.

  Rochambeau, Suzanne (_née_ Rouxel), Countess de, member of the French
        delegation, 17.

  Rock inscription, The, at Crown Point, 240.

  Rodin, Auguste, Bust of “La France” by, 3, 6, 13, 60, 62, 74, 186;
    description of bust by M. Hanotaux, 15, 18;
    inscription on bust, 17;
    works of, 19;
    his theory of Art interpreted by H. W. Hill, 19-20;
    English version of “Art” by, 20n;
    Wickersham on, 35;
    bust presented to Commissions, 50, 53, 55;
    art work of, chosen as symbol of friendship, 65;
    guest at dinner to French delegation on its return to Paris, 91;
    M. Hanotaux on, 93;
    M. Bazin on, 105.

  Rogers, John, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 206.

  Rogers, Robert, Major, the ranger, 231;
    expedition of, against the St. Francis Indians, 234.

  “Roman Poet,” Heber’s statue of the, 2.

  Roosevelt, Theodore, President, approved Joint Resolution, 181.

  Root, Elihu, U. S. Senator, Address of, at Plattsburgh, 38, 143;
    early action of, favoring Tercentenary, 181;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191.

  Rosengarten, Mr. and Mrs. Frank, at luncheon to the French
        delegation, 28.

  Ross, Henry Howard, General, M. C., at Battle of Plattsburgh, 205.

  Ross, James Blanchard, lawyer, native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Rotch, William, met French delegates in Boston, 27.

  Rouse’s Point, Major Robert Rogers defeated the French near, 234;
    historic places near, 235.

  Roy, Ferdinand, President of Canadian Institute at Quebec, 89.

  Royal Artillery, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Royal or 1st Regiment of Foot, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  _Royal Savage_, the, Arnold’s flagship, Permission to raise, 228;
    wreck of, at Valcour Island, 235.

  Royce, Homer Elihu, M. C. and Chief Justice of Supreme Court of
        Vermont, 205.

  Ruggle’s, Col. Timothy, Massachusetts Regiment, under Gen. Amherst,
        127.

  Russell, Mrs. Major, entertained Lafayette, 80.


  Sail down the Lake to Bluff Point, 151-53:
    Port Henry, 151;
    Burlington and its bay like Naples, 151;
    The Four Brothers and Valcour, 152;
    Champlain Hotel, Bluff Point, 153.

  Sailly, Mrs. Frederick, as Mrs. Major Russell, entertained Lafayette,
        80.

  Sailly, Peter, M. C., native of the Champlain valley, 205.

  Sailors, Detachment of, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  St. Elmo, Castle of, and University of Vermont, 151.

  St. Francis Indians, Major Robert Rogers’ expedition against the,
        234.

  St. Gaudens, Augustus, Carl A. Heber in studio of, 2.

  Saint Jean, Welcome of French delegation at, 86.

  St. Jean Baptiste Society, welcomed visitors to Plattsburgh, 77;
    escorted guests to site of Champlain Statue, 159.

  St. John’s, Expedition against, 234;
    surrender of, 243.

  Saint Seine, Henri de. Count, at banquet, 32.

  Ste. Anne, Shrine of, on Isle La Motte, 234.

  SANGER, WILLIAM CARY, Colonel, invited to dedications, 117;
    address at dedication of Tablet, 126;
    represented the President of the United States at dedication of
          Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Lighthouse given to, 138;
    Address receiving Memorial for United States, 140-41:
      States care for local interests, National Government for people
          as a whole, 140;
      democracy and beauty, 140;
      symbolism in Lighthouse, 141.

  Sangha, Future city on the, 14.

  Saranac Chapter, D. A. R., at exercises at Plattsburgh Barracks, 79.

  Sawyer, John Gilbert, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Sawyer, Philetus, M. C., spent his youth in the Adirondacks, 204.

  Saxe, John Godfrey, poet and humorist, 211.

  Schiller, Heber’s statue of, 2.

  Schofield, William Henry, Professor, gave breakfast to French
        delegation, 27.

  School children of America gave statue of Lafayette to French nation,
        163.

  Schools, Mandatory provision for, in Constitution of Vermont, 199.

  Schuyler, John, Captain, camped at Isle La Motte, 234.

  Schuyler, Philip, General, joined Montgomery at Isle La Motte, 234.

  Schuyler’s, Col. Peter, New Jersey Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Scollard, Clinton, on Champlain, 81.

  Scotland conquered long ago, but Scotch present to-day, 146.

  Scrapers and drills of chipped stone, 251.

  Sculptors, Productions of modern French, 19.

  “Sea of the Iroquois,” Lake Champlain, 81, 249.

  Second Infantry N. G. N. Y., Company “I,” at dedicatory exercises, at
        Crown Point Forts, 121, 125.

  Second Regiment N. G. N. Y., Col. J. W. Lester, Obligations of
        Commission to, 191.

  Senators of the United States favoring the Tercentenary, 179.

  Senecal, Andrew George, Mayor of Plattsburgh, welcomed Commissioners
        and guests, 77, 157.

  Settlements, Largest of the early, under protection of Fort Frédéric,
        145.

  Seven Years’ French and Indian War, 227-28.

  Severance, Frank Hayward, Secretary of Preliminary Commission,
        rendered important services to the Commission, 193.

  Seymour, Julius Hubbell, lawyer, 207.

  Shaw, Charles E., lawyer, native of Champlain valley, 207.

  Shaw, Leslie Mortier, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Shea, James, member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 218, 226;
    supervised Memorial Lighthouse, 6, 119;
    present at its dedication, 133;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Shedd, William Greenough Thayer, D.D., Works of, 210.

  Shedden, Lucian Love, Regent of the University, 207.

  Sheldon, Eugene Edmund, Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Sheldon, Melville A., Judge, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Sheldon, Samuel, expert in electric science, 208.

  Shell, Objects of, uncommon, 257.

  Sheridan, Philip Henry, General, Equestrian statue of, by Heber, 2.

  Sherman, James Schoolcraft, Grandfather of, a navigator of Lake
        Champlain, 179.

  Sherman Military Band, Music by, at Lighthouse dedication, 134.

  Sibley, Joseph Crocker, Thanks of Commission to, for use of yacht
        _Valcour_, 192.

  Simmons, George Abel, M. C., a native of Champlain valley, 205.

  Site at Crown Point, Opportunity of, 2, 4;
    made American soil by valor of Green Mountain boys, 136.

  Site for Memorial at Plattsburgh purchased by city, 6, 7, 9.

  Six Nations, The Confederacy of the, called the Iroquois, 247.

  Skinner, Mark, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Skinner, St. John Bull Lawrence, Postmaster-General under Andrew
        Johnson, 206.

  Slade, William, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Slate, Knives of red or purple, found, 252.

  Slavery, Charlevoix on, 39.

  Sloane, William Milligan, Professor, on “the vision of history,” 217.

  Smith, H. Perry, “History of Essex County, N. Y.”, 197.

  Smith, Kirby Flower, Ph.D., an authority on the Latin language and
        literature, 213.

  Smith, Loyal L., philanthropist, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Smith, Melancton, Judge, member of first Provincial Congress, 206.

  Smith, William Farrar, General, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Smith. William L. G., lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Soapstone dishes found, 257.

  Social functions and hospitalities extended to the French visitors
        [by HENRY W. HILL], 23-28:
      Play at the Carnegie Lyceum, 25;
      reception at City Hall, 25;
      luncheon at Metropolitan Club, 25;
      Loan Exhibit of the French Institute, 25-26;
      reception by Senator W. A. Clark, 26;
      visit Washington and Mount Vernon, 26;
      reception at French Embassy, and National Press Club, 26-27;
      ball, 27;
      luncheon at White House, 27;
      dinner on S.S. _France_, 27;
      reception by Society of the Cincinnati, 27;
      visit to Boston and luncheon at Harvard University, 27;
      visit to Philadelphia and luncheon with the Hon. Charlemagne
          Tower, 27-28;
    taxed endurance, 110.

  Society of the Cincinnati, gave reception to French delegation and
        the Commissions, 27.

  Society of Colonial Wars, presented Tablet at English Forts, 121,
        125, 128, 129.

  Sohmer, William, invited to dedications, 117.

  Songs, Old French, preserved among French descendants, 82-83;
    at Saint Jean, 86.

  Southwick, George Newell, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Spalding, Rev. George Burley, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Spalding, James Reed, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Speakers, Representative, from official life, at the Tercentenary
        celebrations, 143.

  Spear and arrow points. Chipped, 251;
    of copper, 258.

  Spears, John Randolph, on Arnold’s naval battle, 232.

  Spooner, Charles Horace, Ph.D., invited to dedications, 118;
    President of Norwich University, 209.

  Stage House, old, in Plattsburgh, Fouquet House on site of the, 159.

  Standish, Lt. Mathew M., a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Stannard, George Jerrison, General, from the Champlain valley, 207.

  Star Spangled Banner, The, played, 77, 86, 126, 134, 163.

  State, Each, cares for matters which concerns its citizens, 140.

  State Historical Societies, 198.

  State Library at Albany, 198.

  State Library at Montpelier, 198.

  Steamboat, The first, on Lake Champlain, 233.

  Steele, George Washington, Jr., Lt. U. S. N., commanding flotilla,
        Obligations of Commission to, 191.

  Stetson, Francis Lynde, at Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 32;
    invited to dedications, 118;
    Address at dedication, accepting Champlain Statue for the city of
          Plattsburgh, 168-69:
      Tribute to Champlain, the Christian explorer, 168-69;
      virtues of Champlain and Macdonough should be emulated, 169;
    A native of the Champlain valley, 206.

  Stewart, John Aikman, Address at dedication of Champlain Statue,
        171-72:
    Nation like individual should possess the homely virtues, 171;
    prophetic vision of Champlain realized, 171;
    Canada and Americans have a common destiny, 171-72.

  Stetson, Lemuel, M. C., and County Judge, born in the Champlain
        valley, 205.

  Stewart, John Wolcott, Governor of Vermont, M. C. and U. S. Senator,
        205.

  Stillness, The awful, of the wilderness, 144-45.

  Stimson, Henry Lewis, Secretary of War, accompanied French delegates
        to Mount Vernon, 26.

  Stone, Arthur Fairbanks, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 226;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Stone implements and weapons found, 249-54.

  Stony Point Park, Flag used at dedication of, 163.

  Story, Joseph, Judge, Works of, edited by Judge E. H. Bennett, 210.

  Street, Douglas Richmond, Lt.-Col., in command of the
        Governor-General’s Foot-Guards, 187.

  Sullivan, John, General, fortified Point au Fer, 235.

  Sulzer, William, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.

  Summer resorts on the Lake, 151.

  Summer School, _see_ Catholic Summer School of America.

  Sunderland, Rev. Byron, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Swanton, Vt., A considerable settlement at, 234;
    tubular stone pipes found near, 255.

  Sweetland, William, Judge, native of the Champlain valley, 207.


  Tablet at English Fort, Unveiling of [HENRY W. HILL], 121-29:
    Report of exercises, 125-26;
    presented by W. C. Sanger, 126;
    description of, with inscription, 127;
    addresses of acceptance by James A. Holden, 128;
    and Frederick B. Richards, 129.

  Taft, William Howard, President, gave a luncheon to the French
        delegates, 27, 45;
    from the banks of La Belle Rivière, 34;
    M. Jusserand on, 37, 38;
    at the Champlain Tercentenary, 52;
    M. Hanotaux on, 91;
    represented at dedicatory exercises by W. C. Sanger, 140;
    reviewed troops at Plattsburgh Barracks in 1909, 158;
    administration of, endorsed, 167;
    commended the Canadian troops, 187;
    obligations of Commissions to, 191;
    on a “traveling show,” 217.

  Tasso on the French, 38.

  Tawney, James Albertus, M. C., favored Tercentenary, 181.

  Taylor, John Caldwell Rainey, member of New York Commission, 225.

  “Télémaque chez Calypso,” Sèvres bisque group presented by French
        Government to C. B. Alexander, 111.

  _Temps, Le_, aided the Franco-American Committee, 16;
    represented by M. Gaston Deschamps, 17;
    M. Deschamps’ report of exercises at Crown Point and Plattsburgh
        in, 80.

  Tenth Infantry N. G. N. Y., Col. John I. Pruyn, Obligations of
        Commission to, 191.

  Tercentenary exercises, _see_ Champlain Tercentenary Celebration.

  Thomas, John Martin, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 226;
    invited to dedications, 118;
    helped to plan programme of dedicatory exercises, 119;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    remarks of, transferring Lighthouse to the Governor of Vermont, 136;
    President of Middlebury College, 209.

  Thompson, Daniel Pierce, on the Iroquois in Vermont, 248-49.

  Thompson, Robert Means, Colonel, provided entertainment for the
        Commission at Ticonderoga, 192.

  Thompson, Zadock, “Northern guide” and histories of the State of
        Vermont by, 197.

  Thompson’s Point, summer resort on east shore, 151.

  Thornton, Arthur Whetham, Captain, defeated British at Otter Creek,
        234.

  Three Rivers, The Village of, burned, 234.

  Thurston, John Mellen, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Ticonderoga, M. Jusserand on visit to, 38;
    early struggles at, 52, 55;
    Commissions and French delegation entertained at, 71-72;
    strategic importance of, 72;
    history of, 72;
    M. Hanotaux on, 92-93;
    work of restoration at, 95, 103;
    M. Bazin’s impressions of, 102-4;
    gallantry of Black Watch at, 129;
    historical incidents at, 143;
    captured by Ethan Allen, 145-46, 231-32;
    history of, merits federal consideration, 228;
    in seven years’ war, 231;
    military pageant at, planned, 235.

  _Ticonderoga_, Steamer, chartered to take guests through Lake
        Champlain, 118, 119, 120, 121, 147;
    trip of, from Crown Point to Bluff Point, 151-54.

  Ticonderoga Historical Society, Library of, 198.

  Tillotson, Lee Stephen, Brig.-Gen., represented Governor of Vermont
        at dedicatory exercises, 120;
    at dedication of Tablet, 125;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Address accepting Lighthouse, 138-40:
      Joint work of New York and Vermont, 138-39;
      dream of, 139;
      Vermont’s appreciation of work of Commissioners, 139;
      tribute to Champlain, 139;
      Memorial transferred to United States, 139-40;
    Address at dedication of Champlain Statue at Plattsburgh, 166-67:
      Cause of Gov. Mead’s absence, 167;
      on the scenery, 167.

  Tonty, Henri de, with Sieur de La Salle, 33.

  Torrey, Augustus, engineer, 208.

  Torrey, Joseph, President of the University of Vermont, 208;
    works of, 210.

  Tower, Charlemagne, entertained French delegates, 28.

  Tracy, Alexandre de Prouville de, Expedition of, to punish the
        Iroquois, 234.

  Trade between France and United States, M. Hanotaux on, 90-91.

  Trade with distant tribes, Evidences of, found, 258.

  Traversy, Capt. de, killed by the Mohawks, 234.

  Treadwell, Thomas, Judge, member of first Provincial Congress, 206.

  Treaties of Alliance, and of Amity and Commerce, with France,
        Centennial of, celebrated, 36.

  Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 230.

  Treaty of Cession of Louisiana, Centennial of, celebrated, 36.

  Treaty of Paris brought rest for a while, 231.

  Tri-color and Fleur-de-lis flags, The, 71.

  Turrel, Joel, M. C., from the Champlain valley, 203.

  Tuttle, Mrs. George Fuller, Remarks of, at exercises at Plattsburgh
        Barracks, 79-80;
    author of “Three centuries in Champlain Valley,” 211.

  Twenty-fourth U. S. Infantry, Obligations of Commission to, 191.


  United States, Arms of, on base of Memorial Lighthouse, 5;
    balance of the world’s power will rest with the, 49;
    represented at the Champlain Tercentenary, 52;
    genius of institutions of, reflected in those of France, 55;
    obligations of, to France, 41, 59-60;
    M. Hanotaux on “la puissance” of the, 60;
    un parallèle entre les deux Républiques, 62-63;
    le commerce franco-américain, 63-64;
    Cardinal Gibbons on debt of, to France for great men, 97;
    Memorial Lighthouse transferred to the, 139, 140;
    found the Tercentenary an occasion to speak for international
        peace, 147.

  United States, Government of, Active co-operation of, 179, 187;
    invitations extended by, through Dept, of State, 179;
    entertained the foreign guests, 218;
    should detail national troops for military pageants, 235;
    should officially participate, 236.

  United States Congress—House of Representatives—Committee on Foreign
        Affairs,
    _see_ Committee on Foreign Affairs.

  United States Reservation at Plattsburgh, _see_ Plattsburgh Barracks.

  University of Paris represented by M. Vidal de la Blache, 17.

  University of Pennsylvania, Members of French delegation visit, 27.

  University of Vermont, Site of the, 151-52;
    Library of the, 198;
    Ira Allen gave property to, 199;
    fine pottery jars in Museum of, 255.

  Unveiling of the Champlain Memorial Lighthouse, 134.

  Unveiling of the Tablet at the English Fort [by HENRY W.
        HILL], 125-29.

  Uriu, Stakichi, Vice-Admiral, represented Japan at the Champlain
        Tercentenary, 52, 187;
    spoke at Ticonderoga, 189.


  Vail, Henry Hobart, publisher, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Valcour Island, First naval battle at, 40, 52, 85, 152, 164, 232.

  _Valcour_, yacht. Thanks of Commission to Hon. Joseph C. Sibley for
        use of, 192.

  Van Patten, William James, member of Vermont Commission, 5, 226;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133.

  Vaudreuil, Philippe de Rigaud, General, 103.

  Veazey, Wheelock Graves, Judge, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Verbeck, William, Brig.-Gen., Chief of staff of Gov. Dix, at banquet,
        32;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    at dedications, 120.

  Vermont, Arms of, on Memorial Light, house, 5;
    children of, contributed to monument, 5;
    origin of name of, 82;
    Senators and Representatives from, invited, 117;
    Governor and other officials of, invited to dedications, 117;
    and prominent citizens, 118;
    altercations with New York, 135;
    a labor of love, 136;
    verses on, by Orville G. Wheeler, 152;
    Republicans in, 167;
    scenery of, 167;
    invitation to come to, 167;
    mandatory provision for schools and a university in first
        constitution of, 199;
    shared in general expenses and in cost of Crown Point Memorial, 218;
    controversies with New York, 232.

  Vermont Commission, _see_ Lake Champlain Tercentenary Commission of
        Vermont.

  Vermont Historical Society, Papers and proceedings of, 198.

  Vermont Legislature, Joint memorial of, appointing Lake Champlain
        Commission, 223-24;
    appropriation for the Commission, 226;
    claims of the Caughnawagas presented to the, 248-49.

  Vermont State Geologist, Seventh report of, 258.

  _Vermont, The_, first steamboat on the Lake, 233.

  Vessel, The first sailing, on the Upper Lakes, 40.

  Vesuvius and Mt. Mansfield, 151.

  Vidal de la Blache, Paul, member of French delegation, 17, 44;
    Address at annual meeting of the Five Academies, 94-97:
      Cherished memory of visit to regions discovered by Champlain, 94;
      history revived as scenes were visited, 94-95;
      Ticonderoga, 95;
      exercises at Crown Point reviewed, 95;
      progress into Canada, 96;
      adoption by America of French heroes, 96;
      emphasis of history on great Frenchmen, 97;
      our American work not a failure, 97;
    beauty of style of, 110.

  Vignan, Nicholas de, Champlain’s mercy to, 164.

  Villages, No permanent Indian, because of hostilities, 250.

  “Vive la France,” 86;
    the sentiment of the friends made in America by the French
        delegation, 110.

  Volontaires, Les, de l’Amitié, 64.

  Volontaires, Les, de la foi et de l’espérance, 64.

  Volontaires, Les, de la Liberté et de l’Indépendance, 64.

  Vosges, The, with Retournemer and Longemer, suggested by view at
        Carillon, 104.

  Voyages across Atlantic, Nine, made by Champlain, 138.

  “Voyages and Discoveries,” by Samuel Champlain, 81.

  Vreeland, Edward Butterfield, M. C., assisted the Commission, 179.


  Wade, Martin Joseph, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Wadhams, Albion Varette, Commodore, a native of the Champlain valley,
        208.

  Wadhams, Rt. Rev. Bishop Edgar Prindle, born in the Champlain valley,
        208.

  Wadsworth, James Wolcott, Jr., member of New York Commission, 225.

  Waldegrave, James, 2d earl, _Pointe de la Couronne_ in letter of, 240.

  Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Banquet in Astor gallery of the, 31;
    John H. Finley toastmaster at, 31, 111.

  Walker, Aldace Freeman, Judge, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Walker, Jesse, Judge, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Walker, Stephen Ambrose, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Walworth, Reuben Hyde, M. C. and State Chancellor, 205, 207.

  War of 1812, British and Canadian documents relating to the, 198.

  Warner, Seth, Colonel, captured Crown Point, 128, 146.

  Warrens, Independence and resolution of the, 199.

  Washington, George, French delegation place wreath of flowers on tomb
        of, 26;
    on justice to the Indians, 38;
    M. Hanotaux on, 46;
    influence of, on Lafayette and other Frenchmen, 54;
    portrait of, in American homes, 65;
    statue of, offered Versailles by Virginia, 75.

  Washington, D. C., Hospitalities extended to French delegation at,
        16, 26-27;
    M. Hanotaux on, 46; M. Bazin on, 101.

  Waterman, Charles Winfield, lawyer, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Watson, William, on Beauty, 153.

  Watson, Winslow Charles, Judge, born in the Champlain valley, 207.

  Watson, Winslow Cossoul, “Military and Political History of Essex
        County,” “Men and times of the Revolution,” and “Pioneer
        history of the Champlain Valley,” by, 197.

  Weapons of stone, copper, and iron found in the valley, 249, 251,
        257-58.

  Weaver, William Rice, member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8, 218;
    supervised the Plattsburgh Memorial, 6;
    on Committee to arrange for its dedication, 119;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    services rendered by, 218.

  Weed, Mr. and Mrs. George Standish, received distinguished guests,
        159.

  Weed, Smith Mead, entertained Commissioners and guests, 158-59;
    lawyer, 207.

  Welcome to French delegation on its arrival, 16.

  Wells, William, General, native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Wentworth, Rev. John Brodhead, D. D., Works of, 211.

  Westport, summer resort, 151.

  Wever, John Madison, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Wheeler, James Rignall, Professor of Greek archæology and art, from
        the Champlain valley, 214.

  Wheeler, Rev. Orville Gould, verses on Vermont, 152;
    Semi-Centennial Poem of University of Vermont, 212.

  Wheeler, William Adolphus, from the Champlain valley, 203.

  White, Edward Douglass, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, from the
        banks of the Mississippi, 33.

  White House, Luncheon at the, to French delegation, 27.

  White man, The, and less advanced races, 39;
    Champlain the first, in the region, 137, 164, 224.

  Whiting’s, Col. Nathan, Connecticut Regiment, under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Wickersham, George Woodward, Attorney-General of U. S., guest at
          Waldorf-Astoria banquet, 31;
    Address of, at banquet, 34-37:
      Tribute to Champlain, 34-35;
      embassy from French nation has worthy object, 35;
      illustrious French names in history of American continent, 35-36;
      French commemorations here, 36;
      welcome and tribute to French delegation, 37;
      accepts the bust “La France,” 37.

  Wilbur, Rev. Earl Morse, native of the Champlain valley, 214.

  Wilcox, Dr. Reynolds Webb, at unveiling of the Tablet at English
        Fort, 126.

  Wilderness, Awful stillness of the, 144.

  Wilds, Percival, looked after details of banquet, 31;
    Secretary of Lake Champlain Association, 117, 118.

  Willard, George, from the Champlain valley, 204.

  Willard’s, Col., Massachusetts Regiment under Gen. Amherst, 127.

  Winooski River, The, 248.

  Witherbee, Sherman & Co., gave English forts at Crown Point to the
        State, 151, 239.

  Witherbee, Mrs. Annie E., Discoveries about the old French Fort made
        by, 76-77.

  Witherbee, Miss Evelyn, unveiled tablet at English fort, 121, 126.

  Witherbee, Frank Spencer, looked after details of banquet, 31;
    met guests and Commissioners at Port Henry, 72;
    made Knight of Legion of Honor, 110;
    invited to dedications, 117;
    present at dedicatory exercises at Crown Point and Plattsburgh, 118;
    Port Henry home of, 151;
    Commission grateful to, 192;
    member of New York Commission, 110, 225.

  Witherbee, Miss Louise G., unveiled Memorial Lighthouse, 134.

  Witherbee, Walter Crafts, member of New York Commission, iii, 4, 8,
        226;
    Treasurer of the Commission, iii, 80, 133, 261;
    Chairman of Committee on Building Memorial Lighthouse, 6, 119;
    met guests and Commissioners at Port Henry, 72;
    tribute of M. Deschamps to, 80;
    made Knight of Legion of Honor, 110;
    Chairman of Committee of arrangements for dedication of the Crown
        Point Memorial, 119;
    at dedication of Memorial Lighthouse, 133;
    Port Henry the home of, 151;
    entertained Commission, 192;
    services rendered by, 218;
    Financial Statement, 263.

  Witherbee Band, The, played for French guests, 72, 82.

  Wood, Leonard, accompanied French delegates to Mount Vernon, 26.

  Wood, Thomas Waterman, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Woodbridge, Frederick Enoch, M. C., born in the Champlain valley, 205.

  Woodford, Stewart Lyndon, General, at banquet to French delegation,
        32.

  Woodruff, Frank Edward, Professor, from the Champlain valley, 208.

  Worcester’s, Col. David, Connecticut Regiment, under Gen. Amherst,
        127.

  Wright, George Frederick, D.D., Works of, 212.

  Wright, George Murray, lawyer, a native of the Champlain valley, 207.

  Wright, Silas, educated at Middlebury College in the Champlain
        valley, 203.

  Wurth, Herman, Sculptor of Tablet at Fort Amherst, 125.


  Xaintongeois, Long live the, 81.


  Year Books, record of antiquarian jurisprudence, 41-42.

  Year 1914, The, centenary of peace, 78.

  York and Lancaster factions acted under legal claims to crown, 40.

  Yorktown, Battle of, French aid at, 59.

  Young America seems Old France to M. Deschamps, 81.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] There has recently appeared from the press of Small, Maynard &
Company, publishers of Boston, Mass., an English version of “Art”
by Auguste Rodin, containing 106 illustrations in halftone and
photogravure.

It is a most important contribution to the literature of “Art” by one
of the greatest living sculptors. It covers practically the whole
range of art and abounds in the analyses of the works of the masters
of painting and sculpture, ancient and modern.

[2] It will be recalled that the Portuguese navigator, Antonio
Galvão, as early as 1528, proposed to Charles V, that interoceanic
communication be opened across the Isthmus of Panama and that in
1550, he is said to have published a book to demonstrate that such
a canal could be constructed at Tehuantepec Nicaragua, Panama or
Darien. In 1551 Francisco Lopez de Gómara urged Philip II of Spain
to proceed with the undertaking without delay. (See Francisco Lopez
de Gómara Hist. Gen’l. Lib. 4, Cap. 14, Larousse Encyclopædic
Dictionary. Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th Edition, vol. xx., pp.
666-667.)

[3] Dr. David Sherwood Kellogg made a collection of 2,500 chipped
stone implements from the shores at Ticonderoga, Wright’s Point and
Orwell. He also collected at Fort Ticonderoga 575 wrought flints in
one day. See his Paper read before the Vermont Historical Society
entitled “Early mention of some events and places in the valley
of Lake Champlain,” published in the Proceedings of the Vermont
Historical Society for 1901-1902.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg ix: ‘View of Robin Bust’ replaced by ‘View of Rodin Bust’.
  Pg 13: ‘an allegorial bust’ replaced by ‘an allegorical bust’.
  Pg 61: ‘il y quelque’ replaced by ‘il y a quelque’.
  Pg 62: ‘ici un parellèle’ replaced by ‘ici un parallèle’.
  Pg 62: ‘aux temps aù César’ replaced by ‘aux temps où César’.
  Pg 63: ‘se trouvre le’ replaced by ‘se trouve le’.
  Pg 103: ‘the forteress of’ replaced by ‘the fortress of’.
  Pg 188: ‘principal commorative’ replaced by ‘principal commemorative’.
  Pg 188: ‘events occuring’ replaced by ‘events occurring’.
  Pg 191: ‘descendents of the tribes’ replaced by ‘descendants of the
           tribes’.
  Pg 228: ‘Sewell S. Cutting’ replaced by ‘Sewall S. Cutting’.
  Pg 233: ‘after Fulton’ steamer’ replaced by ‘after Fulton’s steamer’.
  Pg 247: ‘Professor Ceorge’ replaced by ‘Professor George’.
  Pg 248: ‘from the Mississquoi’ replaced by ‘from the Missisquoi’.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHAMPLAIN
TERCENTENARY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
